Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS
 
VIDEO
 
AUDIO
 
SOFTWARE
 
IMAGES
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "Ramayana (1958)"
See other formats
Hm ^T|T 5TTF*t wvwft 

La! Bahadur Shastri Academy of Administration 

iff** 

MUSSOORIE 

LIBRARY 


srcrfcr srcqr 

Accession No. 

*PT m*T 
Class No. _ 

Book No. _ 




-2$ ± l S 32Z 




QL 294.5922 
RAJ 


102176 

LBSNAA 


^!l Q C <tji > < ^>— <5~lO f^-rJ|b (y^O L—j» C >^ — -^I fl 





3TT sit SWT: sRWt ^ I 

Let noble thoughts come to us from every side 

Rigveda, 1-89-i 


BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


General Editors 

K. M. MUNSHI 
R. R. DIWAKAR 


44 

RAMAYANA 


BY 

C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 


BHAVAN S BOOK UNIVERSITY 

Organising Committee : 

Lilavati Munshi— Chairman 
K. K. Birla 
S. G. Nevatia 
J. H. Dave 
S. Ramakrishnan 



BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


RAMAYANA 

BY 

C. RAJAGOPA LACHARI 



1958 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 


CHOWPATTY 



Copyright and rights of translation and reproduction reserved 
by the Publishers 


BY P. 

505 


1st Edition, May 1957, Copies : 15,000 

2nd Edition, December 1957, Copies : 15,500 

3rd Edition, November 1958, Copies : 20,000 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

H. RAMAN AT THE ASSOCIATED ADVERTISERS AND PRINTERS. 
, ARTHUR ROAD, TARDEO, BOMBAY 7, AND PUBLISHED BY 
S. RAMAKRISHNAN, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN, BOMBAY 7. 



GENERAL EDITOR’S PREFACE 


The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan—that Institute of Indian Culture in 
Bombay—needed a Book University, a series of books which, if read, 
would serve the purpose of providing higher education. Particular 
emphasis, however, was to be put on such literature as revealed the 
deeper impulsions of India. As a first step, it was decided to bring 
out in English 100 books, 50 of which were to be taken in hand almost 
at once. Each book was to contain from 200 to 250 pages and was 
to be priced at Rs. 2/-. 

It is our intention to publish the books we select, not only in 
English, but also in the following Indian languages : Hindi, Bengali, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Maiayalam. 

This scheme, involving the publication of 900 volumes, requires 
ample funds and an all-India organisation. The Bhavan is exerting 
its utmost to supply them. 

The objectives for which the Bhavan stands are the reintegration 
of the Indian cu ture in the light of modern knowledge and to suit 
our present-day needs and the resuscitation of its fundamental values 
in their pristine vigour. 

Let me make our goal more explicit : 

We seek the dignity of man, which necessarily implies the creation 
of social conditions which would allow him freedom to evolve along 
the lines of his own temperament and capacities ; we seek the harmony 
of individual efforts and social relations, not in any makeshift way, 
but within the frame-work of the Moral Order ; we seek the creative 
art of life, by the alchemy of which human limitations are progres¬ 
sively transmuted, so that man may become the instrument of God, 
and is able to see Him in all and all in Him. 

The world, we feel, is too much with us. Nothing would uplift 
or inspire us so much as the beauty and aspiration which such books 
can teach. In this series, therefore, the literature of India, ancient 
and modern, will be published in a form easily accessible to all. 
Books in other literatures of the world, if they illustrate the princi¬ 
ples we stand for, will also be included. 

This common pool of literature, it is hoped, will enable the reader, 
eastern or western, to understand and appreciate currents of world 
thought, as also the movements of the mind in India, which, though 
they flow through different linguistic channels, have a common urge 
and aspiration* 

Fittingly, the Book University’s first venture is the Mahabharata , 
summarised by one of the greatest living Indians, C. Rajagopalachari ; 
the second work is on a section of it, the Gita , by H. V. Divatia, an 

5 



6 


GENERAL EDITOR’S PREFACE 


eminent jurist and student of philosophy. Centuries ago, it was 
proclaimed of the Mahabharata : “ What is not in it, is nowhere.’* 

After twenty-five centuries, we can use the same words about it. He 
who knows it not, knows not the heights and depths of the soul ; he 
misses the trials and tragedy and the beauty and grandeur of life. 

The Mahabharata is not a mere epic ; it is a romance, telling the 
tale of heroic men and women, and of some who were divine ; it is a 
whole literature in itself, containing a code of life, a philosophy of 
social and ethical relations, and speculative thought on human pro¬ 
blems that is hard to rival ; but, above all, it has for its core the Gita , 
which is, as the world is beginning to find out, the noblest of scriptures 
and the grandest of sagas in which the climax is reached in the 
wondrous apocalypse in the Eleventh Canto. 

Through such books alone the harmonies underlying true culture, 
1 am convinced, will one day reconcile the disorders of modern life. 

I thank all those who have helped to make this new branch of 
the Bhavan’s activity successful. 

1, Queen Victoria Road 

New Delhi K. M. Munshi 

3rd October 1951 

GENERAL EDITOR’S SUPPLEMENTARY PREFACE 

The publication of Ramayana , as summarised by Sri C. Raja* 
gopalachari, is a landmark in the progress of the Book University. 

During the last five years that the Book University volumes have 
been in the market, they have commanded an increasingly large audi¬ 
ence. Some of the books have in the main revolved round the objects 
of the Bhavan as stated in my original Preface and have drawn their 
inspiration from the two immortal epics of India. Nothing more 
inspiring has been written by man than the Mahabharata and the 
Ramayana , which are the Collective Unconscious of India and 
contain her message to man. 

We began the Series with the Mahabharata summarised by Sri 
C. Rajagopalachari. To-day, we have the privilege of publishing 
the Ramayana as summarised by him in this Series. Though the works 
of distinguished authors dealing with this epic have appeared in this 
Series, Rajaji’s, work, as always, is striking in its originality and 
beautiful in expression, 

Raj Bhavah 

Nainital K. M. Munshi 

12th May 1957 



AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan has added to the debt of gratitude 
I owe it by undertaking the publication of the English version of my 
Tamil Ramayana. They achieved great success in the distribution 
of my Mahabharata book and I trust this book of the story of Rama 
and Sita will receive similar welcome. 

I wrote the Tamil original of this book in a series of weekly 
chapters in KALKI, in writing which I was greatly encouraged by 
the warm reception they received in the homes of the Tamil people 
all over the country. This book is based on the series that appeared 
contemporaneously in the SUNDAY STANDARD for which Sri 
Ramnath Goenka of th^ ‘Express’ papers was responsible. My friend 
Sri Navaratna Rama Rao has thoroughly revised the English rendering 
and if it is found to be good reading it is due to his affectionate labour 
on this book. The faults such as may be noticed are entirely mine. 
If readers find pathos and beauty in spite of the defects necessarily 
involved in translating such matter into a foreign tongue, it is all 
Valmiki’s magic. The chapters were written for Tamil readers and 
followed a pattern of earnest and intimate talk rather than of written 
prose. 

I must not forget to tender my thanks to Sri K. V. S. Raghavan 
who undertook the laborious task of putting the book in clean type¬ 
script for the press and completed the work with devotion and care. 

Once again, I repeat my confession that in the evening of my busy 
life during a great and eventful period of Indian history, the writing 
of these two books wherein I have retold the Mahabharata and 
Ramayana , is, in my opinion, the best service I have rendered to my 
people. At any rate, they embody the best joy I have experienced; 
for in these two books I helped our great sages to speak to our dear 
men and women again in their own language, elevating their minds 
through the sorrows borne by < Kunti, Kausalya, Draupadi 
Sita. The real need of the hour is a re-communion between us and the 
sages of our land, so that the future may be built on rock and not on 
sand. 


7 



8 


author’s preface 


The sophisticated may be inclined to smile where I have often 
paused in the narration to moralise. To such I must point out that 
when I wrote the original of these pages I had in mind always my very 
young readers and that this is but an English rendering of what I 
wrote in Tamil. 

In presenting this English version to a wider circle of readers spread 
all over the world, I think I am presenting to them the people of Bharat 
just as they are, with all their virtues and their faults. Our classics 
really embody our national character in all its aspects and it is well the 
world sees us as we really are, apart from what we wish to become. 

Madras C. Rajaoopalachari 

10th May 1957 

AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SECOIsTD IMPRESSION 

I am glad that the Bhavan has so soon found a demand for bring¬ 
ing out a second impression of my Ramayana . It fills me not only 
with pride but with satisfaction. Greece—the Greece we all admire— 
is gone, but Homer’s ‘Iliad’ and ‘Odessey’ remain and will remain for 
ever, not only in Greek but in all the languages of the civilized world. 
So also will Valmiki’s Ramayana live in all the tongues of civilized 
people whatever may happen to India and its politics. 

The Ramayana is not history or biography. It is a part of Hindu 
mythology. We cannot understand Greek life and Greek civilisation 
without knowing all about Zeus, Apollo, Hercules, Venus, Hector, 
Priam, Achilles, Ulysses and others. So also one cannot understand 
Hindu dharma unless one knows Rama and Sita, Bharata, Laksh- 
mana, Ravana, Kumbhakama and Hanuman. Mythology cannot 
be dispensed with. Philosophy alone or rituals alone or mythology 
alone cannot be sufficient. These are the three strands of all ancient 
religions. The attitude towards things spiritual which belongs to a 
particular people cannot be grasped or preserved or conveyed unless 
we have all these three. Even an iconoclast like Bernard Shaw has 
acknowledged the essentiality of myths, 

Madras C. Rajaoopalachari 

14th October 1958 



AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


I am grateful to the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan which has brought 
out these fresh reprints of my Ramayana and Mahabharata books. 
The Bhavan has achieved great work by the very wide distribution 
organised by it of these two books, which seek to bring Valmiki and 
Vyasa near to those who have no access to the unrivalled original 
classics. The characters and incidents of these two itihasas have 
come to be the raw material for the works of numerous poets and 
saints that came later to write dramas and sing poems and hymns 
to keep this nation in the straight path. Oral discourses have further 
played with them in order to entertain and instruct pious audiences 
and not a few variations and additions have been made to the original. 
All the languages of India have the Ramayana and Mahabharata 
retold by their poets, with additions and variations of their own. 
It is good to have the narrative written up for young people as told 
in the original epics, and these two books of mine seek to serve that 
object. 

I appeal particularly to the young men in schools and colleges 
to read these books. There is not a page in them but after reading 
you will emerge with greater courage, stronger will and purer mind. 
They are not just story books, although they are very good in that 
way too. They are the records of the mind and spirit of our fore¬ 
fathers who cared for the good, ever so much more than for the 
pleasant and who saw more of the mystery of life than we can do in 
our interminable pursuit for petty and illusory achievements in the 
material plane. We should be thankful to those who preserved for 
us these many-centuries-old epics in spite of all the vicissitudes through 
which our nation passed since Vyasa and Valmiki’s time. Even 
the poets who wrote these epics in the original did not create but built 
out of the inherited bricks of national memory prior to their own time. 
Reading the Ramayana and Mahabharata even in the form 1 have 
given them, we go back to live with our ancient forbears and listen 
to their grand voices. 

Mythology is an integral part of religion. It is as necessary 
for religion and national culture as the skin and the skeleton that 
preserve a fruit with its juice and its taste. Form is no less essential 
than substance. We cannot squeeze religion and hope to bottle 



10 author’s preface to the third edition 

and keep the essence by itself. It would neither be very useful nor 
last very long. Mythology and holy figures are necessary for any 
great culture to rest on its stable spiritual foundation and function 
as a life-giving inspiration and guide. 

Let us keep ever in our minds the fact that it is the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata that bind our vast numbers together as one 
people, despite caste, space and language that seemingly divide them. 

I wish I were gifted with greater vision and greater ability so that 
i could have done this work, to which 1 was called, better than I have 
done. I am thankful however for what 1 have been enabled to do. 
Thorough familiarity with our ancient heritage is necessary if we 
desire to preserve our individuality as a nation and serve the world 
through dharma which alone can save mankind from error and 
extinction. 


Madras 

19th October 1958 . 


C. RAJAGOP ALA CHARI 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 

General Editor’s Preface 



PAGB 

5 


General Editor's Supplementary Preface 


6 


Author’s Preface 



7 


Author’s Preface to the Second 
Impression 



8 


Author's Preface to the Third Edition 

•. 

9 


Note for Pronunciation 



14 

I 

The conception 



17 

II 

Sage Viswaamitra 



19 

III 

Trisanku 



21 

IV 

Raama leaves home 



25 

V 

Raama slays the monsters 



28 

VI 

Seeta 



33 

VII 

Bhageeratha and the story of Ganga 


36 

VIII 

Ahalya 

.. 


38 

IX 

Raama wins Seeta’s hand 

,. 


41 

X 

Parasuraama’s discomfiture 



43 

XI 

Festive preparations 



46 

XII 

Manthara’s evil counsel 



48 

XIII 

Kaikeyi succumbs 



53 

XIV 

Wife or demon? 



58 

XV 

Behold a wonder! 



62 

XVI 

Storm and calm 



67 

XVII 

Seeta’s resolve 



71 

XVIII 

To the forest 



77 

XIX 

Alone by themselves 



82 

XX 

Chitrakoota 



86 

XXI 

A mother’s grief 



88 

XXII 

Idle sport and terrible result 



SO 

XXIII 

Last moments 



92 

XXIV 

Bharata arrives 



94 

XXV 

Intrigue wasted 

.. 


100 


11 






12 


raamaayana 


CHAPTER 

page 

XXVI 

Bharata suspected 

105 

XXVII 

The brothers meet 

111 

XXVIII 

Bharata becomes Raama’s deputy 

116 

XXIX 

Viraadha’s end 

120 

XXX 

Ten years pass 

125 

XXXI 

The Soorpanakha episode 

129 

XXXII 

Kamban’s Soorpanakha 

134 

XXXIII 

Khara and his army liquidated 

136 

XXXIV 

The path of ruin 

140 

XXXV 

The golden stag 

145 

XXXVI 

The good bird Jataayu 

150 

XXXVII 

Closely Guarded 

155 

XXXVIII 

Raama disconsolate 

159 

XXXIX 

A second father dies 

163 

XL 

Left eyelids throb 

166 

XLI 

He sees her jewels 

173 

XLII 

Sugreeva’s doubts cleared 

175 

XLIII 

The slaying of Vaali 

178 

XLIV 

Taara’s grief 

182 

XLV 

Anger and reconciliation 

185 

XLVI 

The search begins 

190 

XLVII 

Son of Vaayu 

195 

XLVIII 

The search in Lanka 

200 

XLIX 

Seeta in the Asoka park 

205 

L 

Raavana’s solicitation 

209 

LI 

First among the astute 

213 

LII 

Seeta comforted 

216 

Lin 

Seeta and Hanumaan 

222 

LIV 

Inviting battle 

226 

LV 

The terrible envoy 

227 

LVI 

Hanumaan bound 

230 

LVII 

Lanka in flames 

233 

LVIII 

A Carnival 

237 

LIX 

The Tidings conveyed 

240 

LX 

The Army moves forward 

242 

LXI 

Anxiety in Lanka 

245 



CONTENTS 


13 


CHAPTER PAG* 

LXII Raavana calls a council again .. 248 

LXII1 Vibheeshana 251 

LX1V The Vaanaras’ doubt .. .. 253 

LXV The Doctrine of surrender and grace 257 

LXVI The Great causeway 2(5(1* 

LXVII The Battle begins 264 

LXVIII Seeta’s joy 266* 

LXIX Serpent darts 270 

LXX Raavana’s defeat 273 

LXXI The Giant is roused 277 

LXX1I Is this Naaraayana Himself ? .. 280 

LXXIII The Death of Indrajit 283 

LXXIV End of Raavana .. 287 

LXXV The End .. 290 

Epilogue .. 294 

Glossary 298 







NOTE FOR PRONUNCIATION 


The vowel sounds in the transliteration of Indian words and 
names in this book are not on the international scheme with diacri¬ 
tical marks. The scheme followed here is, it is hoped, easy of follow¬ 
ing, being in consonance with English spelling and pronunciation. 
The main difficulty in correctly reading romanised Sanskrit is the 
short and long vowel. It is hoped that the scheme followed in this 
book, the single ‘a’ for the short ar and double ‘aa’ for the long 3TT 
* tides over much of this difficulty. 

er — a 

«TT — aa as in ‘war’, ‘call’ 

* —i 

$ — ee as in ‘sheep’, ‘seen’ 

* — ” 

3? — oo as in ‘moon’, ‘cool*, ‘loop’ 

a* — e as in ‘say’, ‘way’, ‘made’ 

^ — ai 

aft — o as in ‘code’, ‘roll’ 

aft — au 

c. g., RAAMA, SEETA, SOORPANAKHA. 


14 



RAAMAAYANA 


Thb traditional orthodox view is that Vaalmeeki wrote the Raamaa • 
yarn during the life-time of Raamachandra. Judging from normal 
experience, however, it would appear that the story of Raama had been 
in existence, though not as a written work, long before Vaalmeeki 
wrote his epic. It looks as though Vaalmeeki gave form to a story that 
had been handed down from generation to generation. That pro¬ 
bably explains some of the difficult features in the story—e.g., the 
slaying of Vaali and Seeta’s exile under Raama’s orders. 

In Vaalmeeki’s work Raama is portrayed as a great and unique 
man, not as an incarnation of God. True, in some chapters there 
are references to him as an avataar of God, but in the body of the 
narrative the Raama pictured by Sage Vaalmeeki is not God himself 
but a great prince endowed with divine qualities. 

Even during Vaalmeeki’s days, the idea was prevalent, to some 
extent, that Raama was an avataar . Centuries later, Kamban and 
Tulasidaas sang the Raamaayana , and by that time it had come to be 
accepted that Sree Raama was an avataar of Vishnu. Raama and 
Krishna were synonyms for Vishnu: and Vishnu, in turn, meant Raama 
or Krishna. Temples had come into existence with ritual worship 
of Raama as God. In a situation like that, how could the later poets 
portray Raama as a mere hero? Any such attempt would have failed. 
Kamban and Tulasidaas were devotees of the highest order. They 
were very different from historians and novelists. 

The story begins with the visit of the Saint Naarada one morning 
to Vaalmeeki’s aashrama . After the usual welcome Vaalmeeki asked 
him: “O, all-knowing Naarada, tell me who among the heroes of 
this world is the highest in virtue and wisdom.” 

Knowing through his supernatural power why Vaalmeeki put the 
question, Naarada answered: “Raama is the Hero that you ask for. 
Born in the Solar dynasty, he is at present ruling in Ayodhya.” Sage 
Naarada then briefly narrated to Vaalmeeki the story of Raama. So 
impressed was Vaalmeeki when he heard Raama’s story that even 
long after Naarada had left, his mind was full of it, and he was 
pondering on it as he went to the river Tamasa for his morning 
ablutions. 

As he was walking along the river-bank he saw in a nearby tree 
two loving krcmncha birds sporting and singing in their joy of life and 
love. Suddenly, the male bird fell down, hit by a hunter’s arrow* 

15 



16 


RAAMAAYANA 


The female bird, seeing her lover rolling on the gound, lamented in 
piteous fashion. 

Observing this, Vaalmeeki burst into a curse: “O, hunter, as 
you have killed one of these love-intoxicated birds, you will wander 
homeless all your long years.’* 

But in a moment the sage recovered himself and was wondering 
why he lost himself in anger: “What right had I to curse the hunter? 
Why was 1 deceived by emotion?” 

Recalling the words of his curse, the Rishi marvelled at the rhythm 
of the words. He discovered that his pity had taken shape in a 
beautiful sloka. He thought that all this was part of the mysterious 
leela of God and went into meditation. 

To Vaalmeeki in meditation appeared the four-faced Brahma, 
and he said: “Be not afraid. These things happened to start you 
on the story of Raama. From sorrow ( soka) sprang verse (sloka) 
and in this metre and rhythm the story should be told. I shall give 
you the vision to see all that happened, aye, even how the characters 
thought and looked, as clearly as one sees a thing lying on the palm of 
one’s hand. And you shall sing it, with my blessings for the benefit 
of the world.” 

Vaalmeeki and his disciples then repeated the verse again and 
again and fixed its pattern firmly in their minds. Then Vaalmeeki 
composed the Raamaayana in that metre and taught it to his disciples. 

Thus was the holy Vaalmeeki-Raamaayana born. The tale of 
the Lord and His Consort born as mortals, experiencing human sorrow 
and establishing dharma on earth, was sung by the Rishi in words of 
matchless beauty. And Brahma’s words have come true: “As long 
as the mountains stand and the rivers flow so long shall the Raamaa- 
vana be cherished among men and save them from sin.” 



CHAPTER I 


THE CONCEPTION 


To The north of the Ganga was the great kingdom of Kosala, 
made fertile by the river Sarayu. Its capital was Ayodhya, built by 
Manu, the famous ruler of the Solar dynasty. From Vaalmeeki’S 
description of the capital of Kosala, it is clear that ancient Ayodhya 
was not inferior to our modern cities. Even in ancient India city 
civilisation had reached a high level. 

King Dasaratha ruled the kingdom from the capital city of 
Ayodhya. He had fought on the side of the Devas, and his fame 
spread in the three worlds. He was the equal of Indra and Kubera. 
The people of Kosala were happy, contented and virtuous. The 
land was protected by a mighty army, and no enemy could come 
anywhere near. 

It contained forts with moats around them as well as many 
defensive installations, and true to its name, Ayodhya defied all 
enemies. (Ayodhya means that which cannot be subdued by war). 

Dasaratha had eight wise ministers, ever ready to advise him 
and execute his orders. Great sages like Vasishtha and Vaamadeva 
and other Braahmanas taught the dharma and performed rituals 
and sacrifices. Taxes were light and punishment of crime was just 
and inflicted according to the capacity of the wrong-doer. Sur¬ 
rounded by the best counsellors and statesmen, the King’s splendour 
shone as the rising sun. 

Many years rolled smoothly by. In the midst of all this pros¬ 
perity Dasaratha had one regret ; he had no son. 

One day in early summer he thought of performing a horse- 
sacrifice for progeny. He consulted his religious masters and, on 
their advice, got Sage Rishya-Sringa to perform the yaaga . 

The yaaga was a grand affair and the invitees included many 
of the kings of the day. It was no easy thing to perform yaagas . 
The location and erection of the sacrificial platform had to be 
attended to in detail strictly according to prescribed rules. There 
were experts whose guidance was sought in arranging things. It 
meant the building of a new camp-city, capable of accommodating 
tens of thousands and providing hospitality and entertainmdht for 
the invitees who included the princes and sages of the land. In 
short, yaagas in those days were something like our present-day State- 
sponsored big scale conferences and exhibitions. 



18 


RAAMAAYANA 


When all arrangements were complete the ceremonies were 
set in motion strictly as enjoined by the Shaastras . 

Contemporaneously with the yaaga in Ayodhya, there was a 
conference of the Devas in heaven. The Devas complained to Lord 
Brahma that Raavana, king of the demons, drunk with the power 
acquired by the boon granted to him by Brahma, was causing them 
untold misery and hardship. They represented to Brahma : ° * It is 
peyond our capacity to subdue, conquer or kill Raavana. In the 
security of your boon, he has grown wicked and insolent and ill- 
treats all, even women. His desire is to dethrone Indra. You are 
our only refuge and it is for you to devise a method by which Raavana 
can be slain and his despotism ended.” 

Brahma knew that he had granted to Raavana the boon prayed 
for by him that he should be invulnerable and invincible against 
Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas and other such beings. In his arrogance, 
Raavana did not care to ask for security against mankind. As 
Brahma revealed this fateful omission all the Gods rejoiced and turned 
to Vishnu. 

Absolutely surrendering themselves to Hari, the Devas begged 
him to be born as a man and put an end to Raavana and his atro¬ 
cities, Hari agreed and assured the Devas that he would be born 
as four sons of King Dasaratha who was then performing a sacrifice 
for progeny. 

As the ghee was poured into the fire and the flames shot up to 
meet it, from out of the flames came a majestic figure, resplendent 
like the noonday sun, holding a bowl of gold. Calling King Dasa¬ 
ratha by his name, the figure said : “ The Devas are pleased with 
you and are answering your prayer. Here is paayasam sent by 
the gods for your wives. You will be blessed with sons if they drink 
this divine beverage.” 

With joy unbounded, Dasaratha received the bowl as he would 
receive a child and distributed the paayasam to his three wives, 
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. He asked Kausalya to drink a 
half of the paayasam and he gave a half of what remained to Sumitra. 
Half of what was then left was drunk by Kaikeyi, and what remained 
was given to Sumitra again. 

Dasaratha’s wives were happy, even as a beggar suddenly coming 
upon buried treasure. And in due course all of them were expectant 
mothers. 



CHAPTER II 


SAGE VISWAAMITRA 


In course of time, Dasaratha’s sons were bom, Raama of 
Kausalya and Bharata of Kaikeyi. Sumitra gave birth to twins, 
Lakshmana and Satrughna she having drunk the divine paayasam 
twice. 

In proportion to the quantity of paayasam drunk by the respective 
mothers, the sons are traditionally considered to be parts of Vishnu. 
Raama was thus half-Vishnu. 

But such calculations have no meaning as it is impossible to 
measure the Infinite arithmetically. Sruti tells us that even a fraction 
of the Supreme Being is whole and complete by itself. 

“Om Poornamadah Poornamidam Poormat Poornamudachyate 

Poornasya Poornamaadaaya Poornamevaavasishyate." 

“That is whole; this is whole; what has come out of the whole is 
also whole. When the whole is taken out of the whole, the whole still 
remains whole.” 

Dasaratha’s four sons were given all the training prescribed 
for princes. Raama and Lakshmana were specially devoted to each 
other, and so were Bharata and Satrughna. We can imagine that 
this special attachment arose out of the way the divine paayasam 
was divided among the King’s wives. Dasaratha was happy to 
see his four sons grow up strong, virtuous, brave and lovable and 
with all other princely qualities. 

One day as the King was contemplating his sons’ matrimony, 
ushers rushed in to announce that the great Sage Viswaamitra had 
arrived to see him. Viswaamitra was held in awe by all as the most 
powerful among rishis. 

Viswaamitra’s arrival at Ayodhya was unexpected ; and King 
Dasaratha stepped down from his throne and advanced a few paces 
respectfully to receive the sage. 

Viswaamitra was a king who attained sainthood through terrible 
austerities. He had long ago exhibited his spiritual powers by start¬ 
ing to create another Brahma and a rival universe : he had gone as 
far as the creation of new constellations, but was prevailed upon to 
stop by the entreaties of the alarmed gods. 

Viswaamitra, while he was king, once went out with his army 
and chanced to visit Vasishtha’s aashrama . The rishi cordially 
welcomed his royal guest and his huge entourage and extended to 
than all a hospitality so sumptuous that the King wondered where 



20 


RAAMAAYANA 


all the rich abundance came from in a forest hermitage. Questioned 
by him, Visishtha called his cow Sabala and explained that she was 
the fountain of unfailing plenty. 

Expressing gratitude to the sage, King Viswaamitra said : “ You 
must give me this cow as she would be more useful with me than with 
you. Such things of power and wealth by right belong to the King.” 

Now, Vasisntha could not part with the divine cow. He gave 
many reasons and asked the King not to press his request. But 
the more unwilling Vasishtha was to give the cow, the more eager 
the King became to possess her. 

Failing in his efforts to tempt or persuade the sage to part with 
the cow, Viswaamitra became angry and ordered his men to seize 
the cow by force. 

Sabala could not understand why she was being roughly handled 
and she was unwilling to go away from the sage and his aashrama. 
Shedding tears, she wondered how she had offended Vasishtha 
that he should stand by and look on while she was being dragged 
away. The cow easily put to flight the soldiers and sought refuge 
at the feet of the sage. 

Moved by the piteous appeal of his beloved cow, who was like 
a younger sister to him, the sage said: “Bring forth soldiers to resist 
Viswaamitra’s men.” 

Sabala instantaneously did so, and the aggressors were soon 
worsted. Wild with rage, Viswaamitra got into his chariot and, 
taking up his bow, rained arrows on the soldiers brought forth by 
the cow, but their strength was inexhaustible, and the royal forces 
suffered utter defeat. The sons of Viswaamitra now chose Vasishtha 
himself as their* target, only to be reduced to ashes. 

Defeated and disgraced, Viswaamitra then and there entrusted 
his kingdom to one of his sons and proceeded to the Himaalayas to 
perform tapas, directing his devotions to Lord Siva to gain power 
with which to subdue Vasishtha. 

So firm and steadfast was Viswaamitra in his austerities that 
Lord Siva was pleased and appeared before him. He asked the king 
what his object was in performing tapas. 

Viswaamitra replied: “If you, Umaapati, are satisfied with my 
tapas let me be blessed with divine arrows and be master of every 
weapon.” 

“So be it ” said Siva, and gave Viswaamitra all the weapons 
available to the Devas, Gandharvas, Rishis, Yakshas and Demons. 

Swelling with pride like the ocean, Viswaamitra considered 
Visishtha as already vanquished. He straightway made for the 
abode of the sage. Frightened at the fearful sight of the onrushing 



TRISANKU 


21 


Viswaamitra, Vasishtha’s disciples and the animals in his aashrama 
ran helter-skelter. 

Hit by the fire-weapon of Viswaamitra, Vasishtha’s aashrama 
was reduced to cinders. 

Vasishtha regretted the turn of events, but determined to end 
the haughtiness of the erstwhile king, he faced him calmly with his 
Brahmadartda —holy staff—in hand. Mad with rage, Viswaamitra 
shot at him all the divine weapons he had acquired, but they 
were quenched as they approached the rishi’s staff and were 
absorbed by it. 

Viswaamitra had but one more weapon in his armoury, and 
that was the most powerful of all—the Brahmaastra . As he hurled 
it against Vasishtha, the world became wrapped in gloom as in some 
huge eclipse, and the very immortals trembled with fear. But the 
terrible astra itself was merged in the rishi’s staff, making both it and 
the holy man glow with the glory they had absorbed. 

Viswaamitra stood dazed. Openly accepting defeat, he said: 
“Of what use is the Kshatriya’s might in arms? With but a staff in 
his hand, this Vasishtha has nullified all my weapons. Lord Siva 
has indeed fooled me. There is no alternative for me but to become 
a Brahma Rishi like Vasishtha.” So saying, he withdrew from the 
field of battle and proceeded south for more rigorous tapas. 

For years and years Viswaamitra went through terrible aus¬ 
terities. Pleased with his perseverance, Brahma presented himself 
before him. Advising Viswaamitra that, as a result of his tapas , 
he had risen to the position of a rishi among kings, Brahma vanished 
from the scene. 

Viswaamitra was disappointed that all his penance could get 
him only the status of Raaja Rishi . Not content with anything but 
the highest—the rank of a Brahma Rishi —he subjected himself to 
still more rigorous austerities in order that he might be acknowledged 
an equal of Vasishtha. 


chapter m 
TRISANKU 

That was the time when the famous king of the Solar dynasty, Tri- 
sanku, was reigning, who was so much in love with the beauty of his 
body that he could not bear the thought of parting with it at death 
and desired to ascend to heaven in that very body. 

Vasishtha, his preceptor, whom he approached for help in realising 



22 


RAAMAAYANA 


his wish, advised him to give up attempting the impossible. Dissatis¬ 
fied with Vasishtha’s response, the King approached the sage’s 
sons and sought their help. They were wroth at being asked to do 
something which their father had pronounced impossible, ridiculed 
his vanity and curtly bade him begone. 

King Trisanku would not give up his aim and told them that, 
since they and their father were too poor in merit to help him, he 
would find others who were richer. Vasishiha’s sons were provoked 
beyond endurance, and said: “Be you a chanciaala .” 

The curse began to act and the next morning Trisanku woke 
up a different person altogether, an untouchable, ugly of form, attired 
in dirty clothes. 

His ministers and his people could not recognise him. Driven 
out of his kingdom he wandered hungry and weary almost to death, 
till his destiny took him to Viswaamitra’s aashrama . 

The king’s appearance moved the heart of the sage, who enquired: * 
’“Aren’t you King Trisanku? What has brought you to this plight? 
Whose curse?” 

Recounting all that had happened he fell at the sage’s feet and 
said: “I have been a good king and never swerved from the path 
of dharma. 1 have committed no sin and wronged none. My pre¬ 
ceptor and his sons have deserted me and cursed me and you see me 
thus before you.” 

Viswaamitra took pity on the King converted by a curse into 
a chandaala. This was Viswaamitra’s great weakness; he was im¬ 
pulsive and easily over-powered by emotions like anger, sympathy 
and love. 

In sweet words, he made the king happy: “O, King, I have 
heard of your righteous rule. I offer you refuge; be not afraid. I 
will arrange for the sacrifice which will enable you to enter heaven 
in your own body. And in this very chandaala form you shall reach 
heaven despite your Guru’s curse. Of this you may be sure.” 

And he made arrangements for a great and unprecedented yaaga . 

Viswaamitra directed his disciples to invite all the sages and their 
disciples for the proposed yaaga. Afraid of saying “ No ” to what 
was more or less a command, all the rishis agreed to be present. 

But the sons of Vasishtha declined the invitation and made 
merry about a yaaga at which the officiating priest was a once-upon 
-a-time Kshatriya and the yajamaan a stinking chandaala. 

This reply, duly conveyed, enraged Viswaamitra who exploded 
into a curse that Vasishtha’s sons do die and be re-born for seven 
generations in a tribe given to eating dog’s flesh. 

The sage then began the yaaga . Extolling Trisanku’s eminent 



TRISANKU 


virtues, Viswaamitra sought the help of the other rishis in effecting 
the bodily translation of Trisanku to heaven. 

Well aware of the sage’s mighty powers and fulminous temper* 
the invitees lent their support, and the yaaga went on. It reached 
the stage when the gods were invoked to descend and accept the 
offerings. But no god came. It was clear that Viswaamitra’s yaaga 
was a failure. And the rishis who had attended the ceremony, laughed 
within themselves at Viswaamitra’s discomfiture. 

Wild with rage, Viswaamitra held the ladle of ghee over the flames 
and said: “O Trisanku, here behold my power. I now transfer for 
your benefit all the merit I have earned. If my austerities have any 
value, they should lift you to heaven in your physical frame. 1 care 
not if the Devas reject my offerings. O King Trisanku! Ascend!’* 

A miracle followed. To the astonishment of those assembled, 
Trisanku in his chanciaala body rose heavenward. The world saw 
the power of Viswaamitra’s tapas. 

Trisanku reached Swarga. But Indra forthwith pushed him 
down saying, “Who are you, entering heaven with a chandaala body? 
You fool that earned the curse of your preceptor, go down again,” 

Trisanku fell from heaven, head downwards, screaming, “O 
Viswaamitra! Save me!” x 

Viswaamitra, seeing this, was beside himself with rage. Deter¬ 
mined to teach the gods a lesson, he shouted to Trisanku, “Stop 
there! stop there!” and, to the amazement of all, Trisanku’s earth¬ 
ward descent came to an abrupt stop and he stopped in mid-air, shining 
like a star. Like a second Brahma, Viswaamitra proceeded to create 
a new starry horizon to the south as well as a new Indra and new 
Devas. 

Alarmed for their supremacy, the Devas now came to terms and 
humbly entreated Viswaamitra to desist. They said: “Let Tri¬ 
sanku stay where he is at present. Let the other stare of your creation 
shine for ever, like your own fame and honour. Control your anger 
and be friends with us.” 

Gratified at this submission, and as easily appeased as provoked* 
Viswaamitra halted his creative process. But his stupendous acti¬ 
vities had consumed the whole of the power that he had thus far 
acquired by his austerities, and he found he had to begin again. 

Viswaamitra now proceeded westwards to Pushkara and re¬ 
sumed his austerities. For years the rigorous tapes continued, but 
once again as it was about to bear fruit something happened to rouse 
his anger and he lost his balance and cursed his own sons. Soon 
recovering himself, he firmly resolved never again to yield to anger* 
and resumed his tapas. 



24 


RAAMAAYANA 


After many years of austerities, Brahma and the Devas appeared 
before him and said: “O Kausika! Your tapas has borne fruit. You 
are no longer in the ranks of kings; you have become a real rishi.” 
Having thus blessed Viswaamitra, Brahma returned. 

This was again a disappointment. He wanted to become a 
Brahma Rishi and Vasishtha’s peer and he had only been acknow¬ 
ledged an ordinary rishi. It was a recognition as futile as the missiles 
of power which Vasishtha’s Brahmadanda had swallowed. 

He therefore decided to go on with his tapas , making it more 
severe than ever before. 

The Devas did not like this. They sent the heavenly damsel 
Menaka to tempt him with her celestial beauty and allurements. 
She went toPushkara where Viswaamitra was undergoing austerities, 
and played to catch his eye with a hundred wiles of charm and grace. 
Viswaamitra saw her and was fascinated by her beauty. His vow 
was broken and he spent ten years in a dream of joy, forgetful of his 
high resolve. 

Awaking at last, he looked at the trembling Menaka sorrowfully 
and said he would not curse her, for it was his own folly, and not 
her fault, as in tempting him she was only carrying out the orders of 
her master. And sadly l?e wended his way to the Himaalayas to 
resume his broken tapas . 

There, for a thousand years, controlling his senses, he perform¬ 
ed rigorous tapas . At the request of the Devas, Brahma appeared 
before Viswaamitra, and spoke to him thus sweetly: “I welcome 
you as a Maharishi my son. Pleased with your soulful tapas I confer 
on you that title and the sanctity it imports.” 

Unmoved alike by gratification or disappointment, Viswaa¬ 
mitra folded his hands in adoration and asked the Father of the 
Universe if the boon meant conquest over the senses. 

“By no meaijs,” said the Creator, “but strive to subjugate the 
senses, O tiger among munisl” 

Resolved on the supreme conquest, Viswaamitra entered on 
another thousand years of even harder tapas which threw the Devas 
into even greater consternation. 

Indra called unto him the celestial damsel Rambha, and en¬ 
joined on her as a vital service to the Devas, to employ all her art 
to bring Viswaamitra under the spell of her charm, and divert him 
from his purpose. She was sorely afraid, but Indra assured her that 
she would not be left alone, but be accompanied by the God of Love 
and the Spirit of Springtime would be with her for support. Un¬ 
willingly she went and as she entered the precincts of the hermitage, 
the forest blossomed into vernal beauty, and the south wind blew 



RAAMA LEAVES HOME 


25 


gently, laden with the scent of flowers, and kokilas burst into song. 
Love and Spring were both there to assist Beauty. Disturbed by 
stirrings to which he had long been a stranger, Viswaamitra opened 
his eyes and saw a smiling damsel of surpassing beauty, who seemed 
the very soul of the spring with its flowers and fragrance and song. 
At this vision of soft voluptuousness a white heat of anger surged 
through him as he recognised in it another temptation thrown in his 
way by the envious gods, and he cursed the temptress: “O Rambha, 
for seeking to tempt me who am striving to conquer anger and desire, 
be thou frozen to an image of stone for ten thousand years.” 

But this explosion of rage made him see how far he was from the 
fulfilment of his purpose and sadly he quitted the Himaaiayan forests, 
and sought the solitude of the east. There, he restrained his breathing, 
gave up all thought of the things of the world, and performed aus¬ 
terities so stem that smoke and flames issued from his body and en¬ 
veloped the universe. Then at the prayer of the panic-stricken gods, 
Brahma again appeared before him, and hailed him as Brahma Rishi 
—“All hail, Brahma Rishi , I am pleased with you. Blessed be your 
life.” Viswaamitra was happy. 

But humbly he said: “How can I be happy unless from Vasish- 
tha’s lips I hear that I am a Brahma RishiV' 

Vasishtha smiled remembering his fight with Viswaamitra, and 
said to him: “You have achieved the fruit of your great austerities. 
Indeed you are a Brahma Rishi , my brother.” There was joy all 
round. 

This was the story of the sage that arrived suddenly at Dasa- 
ratha’s court. 


CHAPTER IV 

RAAMA LEAVES HOME 

Kino Dasaratha received Viswaamitra as Indra would welcome 
Brahma and touching his feet, the King Said: ”1 am indeed blessed 
among men. Your coming can only be due to the merit of my an¬ 
cestors. Like the morning sun that dispels the darkness of night, 
your face brings joy to my sight. My heart is full. Bom a king, you 
have become through tapas a Brahma Rishi , And you yourself have 
come seeking my dwelling. Is there anything in my power that I 
can do for you? If so, command and I shall obey.” 

Viswaamitra was rejoiced to hear these words of Dasaratha, 
and his face brightened. He said: “O King, your words are worthy 



26 


raamaayana 


of you. Bom in the Ikshvaaku line, with Vasishtha for your Guru, 
-what else could you say? You have said ‘yes’ before I asked. This 
fills my heart with joy.” And he sraightway explained the purpose 
of his visit. 

Viswaamitra said: “I am engaged in performing a scarifice. 
As it nears completion, two powerful Raakshasas , Maareecha and 
Subaahu, defile it. They shower unclean blood and flesh on the 
sacred fire. Like other rishis we could curse and destroy them. But 
that would be a waste of all our tapas. 

“Our troubles will end if you send with me Raama, the eldest 
of your warlike sons. Under my care, he will grow in princely stature. 
He will surely defeat these Raakshasas and his name will gather lustre. 

“Entrust Raama to my care only for a few days. Do not refuse 
tny request. Fulfil the promise you gave me unsought. Of Raama’s 
safety you need have no anxiety. You will earn undying fame in the 
three worlds. Vasishtha and your ministers will agree with what 1 
say.” 

Dasaratha trembled with fear and anxiety. He had a hard choice 
to make; either to give his well-beloved son to be killed by the 
Raakshasas ; or himself incur the terrible anger of Viswaamitra. 

For a few moments, Dasaratha stood speechless, for he was 
stunned and bewildered. But recovering from the shock, he begged 
the sage nor to press his demand, and said: “Raama is not yet fully 
sixteen years of age. How can he fight with Raakshasas ? Of what 
<use is it to send him with you? What does he know of the wiles of 
Raakshasas ? 

“It is not right that I should send a mere lad to fight them. 1 
am here, and my army is ready to march. How can a lad protect 
you and your yaagal Tell me all about your foes. I shall go with 
you at the head of my army and do your bidding and serve your need. 
Do tell me all about these desecrators.” 

Viswaamitra described Maareecha and Subaahu and Raavana 
their master. And he demanded again that Raama should be sent 
along with him. 

Dasaratha persisted in refusal. “Parting from Raama will be 
death to me,” be said. “I shall go with you, I and my army. Why, 
it seems to me the task proposed is pretty hard even for me. How 
then can my son cope with it? Indeed, I cannot send him. If you 
please, I am ready with my army.” 

Dasaratha’s attempt to go back on his hasty word, enraged Vis¬ 
waamitra. The King’s pleas and reasons were idee oil poured on the 
fire of his anger. 

i4 This conduct is unworthy of your lineage,” the sage said. “Tell 



RAAMA LEAVES HOME 


27 


me if this is your final word. I shall go back the way I came. Long, 
may you live with your kith and kin, having swerved from the path 
of Truth!" 

The earth quaked and the gods were afraid of the possible con* 
sequences of the sage's wrath. 

Vasishtha now turned to the King and spoke gently: “It ill 
becomes you. King, to refuse having promised once. Born in the 
Ikshvaaku line, you cannot do it. Having once said, ‘I will do’, you 
have no option but to do it. Failing, you will lose the merit of all 
your great gifts and deeds. 

“Send Raama with the sage, and send Lakshmana too. You 
need have no fear for their safety. When they are protected by Vis* 
waamitra, no Raakshasa can hurt them. 

“As the drink of the gods is shielded by the wheel of fire, so will 
Raama be by Viswaamitra. You have no idea of Viswaamitra’s 
power; he is tapas in human form. Bravest of the brave and wisest 
of the wise, he is master of every weapon. In the three worlds there 
is not, and there will never be, any to equal him in martial or spiritual 
prowess. When he was king, he obtained from the gods mastery 
of all weapons. He beholds the past, the present and the future. 
Then why does he want the princes, you may wonder. He can well 
take care himself of his yaaga\ but it is for the good of your sons that 
he has come here and appears to seek your help. Do not hesitate. 
Send your sons with him.” 

Listening to the wise Vasishtha, Dasaratha saw things clearly 
and made up his mind to send Raama and Lakshmana. 

The two princes were then brought to the presence of the sage. 
The King, the Queen-Mothers and Vasishtha blessed them and sent 
them with Viswaamitra. 

A pleasant breeze wafted and flowers were strewn by the denizens 
of the heavens. Auspicious sounds were heard. Bow in hand, the 
two lads strode proudly on either side of the sage. 

Vaalmeeki and Kamban revel in this picture of the two hand¬ 
some princes marching out to their first adventure under the guardian¬ 
ship of a great rishi who had also been a renowned warrior—a teacher 
who could create a new world; and beside him, head erect, two prin¬ 
cely pupils born to end the Raakshasa race. 

With swords of victory hanging from their waists, bows and 
quivers mounted on strong shoulders, they moved, each like a three¬ 
headed cobra with uplifted hood. 



CHAPTER V 


RAAMA SLAYS THE MONSTERS 


Viswaamitra and the two princes spent the night on the bank of the 
river Sarayu. Before retiring Viswaamitra initiated the princes in 
two secret mantras Bala and Atibala , which had the virtue of guarding 
them from fatigue and harm. They slept on the verdant bank that 
night and rising at dawn proceeded on their journey. They reached 
Kaamaashrama in Anga Desa. After presenting the princes to the 
rishis there, Viswaamitra recounted to them the history of the 
aashrama . 

“This,” he said, “is the place where the Lord Siva was long en¬ 
gaged in austerities. It was here that the foolish God of Love Man- 
matha aimed his arrow at Siva and was turned to ashes by his wrath. 
Hence this place is known as Kaamaashrama.” 

They were the guests of the rishis that night, and the following 
morning, after performing the usual rites, the sage and his pupils set 
out on their journey and reached the Ganga. They crossed the river 
on a raft got ready for them by the rishis. 

In midstream, the princes heard a noise and asked Viswaamitra 
what it could be. He explained to them that it was the sound of the 
Sarayu flowing into the Ganga. The princes paid silent homage to 
the confluence of the two holy rivers. 

A river or a hill, a tree or a cloud—indeed any object of beauty 
may raise one to contemplation of the Supreme Being and silent 
worship of Him. In particular, sacred rivers, temples or images, 
which have for generations been the objects of devotion and worship, 
possess this power in a special degree, in virtue of the sacred thoughts 
they have witnessed, and absorbed as garments retain perfumes. 

Having crossed the Ganga, Viswaamitra and the princes made 
their difficult way through a dense forest made dreadful by the rever¬ 
berating roar of wild beasts. 

“Ibis,” Viswaamitra said, “is the Dandaka forest What is 
now a terrible forest was once a well-peopled country. Once upon 
a time, Indra was contaminated by sin, having killed Vritra, and had 
therefore to exile himself from the world of the Devas. The Devas 
set to themselves the task of cleansing Indra. They brought waters 
from the sacred rivers and bathed him to the accompaniment of 
mantras . The waters which cleansed Indra flowed into the ground 
asul enriched the earth and the land became tremendously fertile.” 
All dead things—rotting corpse or stinking garbage—when returned 



RAAMA SLAYS THE MONSTERS 


29 


to the earth are transformed into things of beauty such as fruits and 
flowers and the wholesome things that nourish life. Such is the al- 
chemy of Mother Earth. 

Viswaamitra continued: “For long people lived here happily 
till Taataka (wife of Sunda, a Yaksha ) and her son Maareecha wrought 
havoc and changed this into the dreadful wilderness it now is. They 
are still in this forest. And none dare enter it for fear of Taataka. 
She is equal in strength to a score of elephants. I have brought you 
here to rid the forest of this great enemy. There js no doubt that 
this monster, who is a source of trouble to the rishis, will be destroyed 
by you.” 

Raama, who listened to this, asked the sage: “You say she is 
a Yaksha. I have never heard that Yakshas are particularly strong. 
What is more, how does a woman happen to possess so much strength?” 

Viswaamitra replied: “You are asking a very pertinent ques¬ 
tion. Her strength comes from a boon granted by Brahma. There 
lived a Yaksha by name Suketu. Having no progeny he performed 
tapas and won a boon from Brahma thus: ‘You will have a beautiful 
daughter of great strength of body, but you will have no son.’ Sukctu’s 
daughter, Taataka, beautiful and strong, was married to Sunda, a 
Yaksha , and their child is Maareecha. 

“Sunda at one time incurred Sage Agastya’s curse and died. 
Provoked by this, Taataka and Maareecha pounced on Agastya who 
cursed them to be monsters living on the carcases of men. So Taataka 
is now an ugly monster. 

“Thenceforward, she and Maareecha have been harassing the 
dwellers in this region of Agastya. Do not hesitate to destroy her 
on the ground that it is against Kshatriya dharma to kill a woman. 
Her atrocities are intolerable. To punish the wicked, whether male 
or female, is the duty of kings. It is right to kill her, as to kill a wild 
animal for the sake of human safety. This is a duty cast on rulers. 
Many women have been punished with death for their crimes. Hence 
do not hesitate.” 

Raama said to Viswaamitra: “Our father’s behest is that we 
should obey you without question. Bidden by you and for the general 
welfare, we shall kill Taataka. 1 ’ 

So saying, he strung his bow and twanged it till the forest echoed 
to its shrill note and the wild animals scattered in all directions in 
terror. It reached Taataka in her fastness, Ailing her with amaze¬ 
ment at the audacious intruder who dared enter her domain. Raging 
with anger, she ran in the direction whence the sound came, and sprang 
m Raama. The battle began. 

The prince at first thought of cutting off the hmbs of the monster 



30 


RAAMAAYANA 


and sparing her life. But Taataka attacked fiercely and, rising in the 
sky, she rained stones on Raama and Lakshmana. The two princes 
defended themselves against the attack. The fight continued and 
Viswaamitra cautioned Raama against delay in dealing the death¬ 
blow to the monster. 

“She deserves no sympathy,*’ he said. “The sun is about to 
set and remember that at night Raakshasas grow stronger. Do 
not delay to slay her.” 

Thus advised, Raama decided on killing Taataka and pierced 
her chest with a*deadly arrow and the huge, ugly monster fell down, 
lifeless. 

The Devas cheered, and Viswaamitra, filled with joy, embraced 
Raama and blessed him. 

With Taataka’s end, the forest was freed from the curse and be¬ 
came beautiful to see. The princes spent the night there and next 
morning they proceeded to Viswaamitra’s aashrama. 

At dawn the next day, Viswaamitra called Raama to his side and 
blessing him said: “I am very happy indeed. What is it that I can do 
in return for all that you have done? 1 shall teach you the use of all 
the astras .” 

So saying, Viswaamitra gave Raamachandra the divine astras 
which he had obtained through his tapas. Viswaamitra taught Raama 
the use, control and recall of the various divine weapons and Raama 
in his turn imparted the knowledge to Lakshmana. 

As they continued the journey, Raama pointed to a big hill with 
a lovely forest on its slopes and asked: “Is that the place whereto we 
have to go? And who are the evil ones who hinder your yaagal 
And what should I do to destory them?” 

Raamachandra was eager to fight and win the blessings of the 
sage. 

“That is the place we are going to,” replied Viswaamitra. “There 
the Lord Naaraayana performed tapas and it was there that he was 
born as Vaamana. It goes by the name of Siddhaashrama. 

“Mahaabali, son of Virochana and grandson of Prahlaada the 
good Asura, was such a powerful ruler that of him oven the Devas 
were afraid. Mahaabali had by his deeds acquired the power of 
Indra himself. 

“Kashyapa and his spouse Aditi, of whom all the gods were off¬ 
spring, prayed to Vishnu and begged Him to be born as their son and 
protect Indra and the Devas from Mahaabali. In answer to the 
prayers, Vishnu was born of Aditi as Vaamana. 

“Vaamana in the form of a young student went to th cyaaga that 
was being performed by Mahaabali and whereto all were welcome, 



RAAMA SLAYS THE MONSTERS 


31 


to ask for and receive anything they wanted. When Vaamana pre¬ 
sented himself as a suitor, Mahaabaii’s guru, Sukra—the preceptor of 
all the Asuras—-knew who he really was and warned Mahaabali against 
promising to grant the young Braahmana his request—that indeed he 
was the Lord Hari in disguise come to undo him. 

“Mahaabali did not pay heed to this. It was his wont never to 
turn down a request. Besides, he was at heart a devotee of the Lord, 
and felt that he would indeed be blessed if the Lord should deign to 
accept a gift from him. With a smile, Mahaabali bad$ him ask for 
what he pleased, without hesitation: ‘All I have is at your disposal, 
money, jewels, the wide earth and all it inherits.’ 

“Vaamana answered that wealth was of no use to him, and all 
he begged for was three paces of ground, as paced by him. 

“The monarch smiled as he looked at the diminutive brahma- 
chaarVs legs and said, ‘So be it; pace and take it.’ 

“The little Bachelor suddenly grew in size into Trivikrama and 
with one step measured the earth and with another the entire heavens. 
And there being no room left for the third step that had been granted, 
he set his foot on Mahaabali’s devoted head. In the eyes of God, the 
head of a bhakta is as wide as the earth or the heavens. And Ma¬ 
haabali, whose head was blessed by the touch of Naaraayana’s foot, 
became one of the seven immortals of the world.” 

After narrating the story of Mahaabali, Viswaamitra added: 
“This is where at first Naaraayana and later Kashyapa performed 
tapas , resulting in the incarnation of God as Vaamana. In this holy 
place I live. And here the Raakshasas come and obstruct our wor¬ 
ship and our austerities. Your coming here is to end this evil.” 

• “So be it,” said Raama. 

The arrival of Viswaamitra and the two princes was a signal for 
rejoicing at the aashrama ; the rishis offered water and fruits according 
to custom. Raama told Viswaamitra that he might begin the pre¬ 
parations for his yaaga immediately and Viswaamitra took the vows 
that very night. 

Getting up very early the next morning, the princes went to Vis¬ 
waamitra and asked when the Raakshasas were expected so that they 
might hold themselves in readiness to receive them. 

Viswaamitra was under a vow of silence, and could not answer, 
but the rishis, his juniors, told the princes that they should be cease¬ 
lessly vigilant for six nights and days to safeguard the sacrifice. 

The princes, fully armed, kept vigil for six days and nights. On 
the morning of the sixth day Raama told Lakshmana: “Brother, 
now is the tune for the enemies to come. Let us be wary.” 



32 


RAAMAAYANA 


Even as he was saying this, flames shot up from the scrificial fire, 
for Agni, the God of Fire, knew that the Raakshasas had arrived. 
As the rites were being performed, there was heard from the sky a 
great roar. 

Raama looked up and saw Maareecha and Subaahu and their 
followers preparing to shower unclean things on the sacrificial fire. 
The army of Raakshasas covered the sky like a great black cloud. 

Raama said, “Look Lakshmana," and let go the Maanavaastra 
at Maareecha. As was intended, it did not kill Maareecha, but wrap¬ 
ping him up in resistless force hurled him a full hundred yojanas near 
the sea. 

With the Aagneyaastra Raama killed Subaahu; and then the two 
princes utterly destroyed the entire army of Raakshasas . 

The sky was bright again. 

Viswaamitra was supremely happy at the completion of his yaaga . 
“I am grateful to King Dasaratha,” he said. “You have fulfilled 
the promise, princes. I admire your fortitude. This aashrama has 
through you become again a scene of success, Siddhaashrama.” 
(‘Siddha’ means success). 

The next day, Raama and Lakshmana, after their morning prayers, 
went to Viswaamitra and asked for further orders. 

The purpose of Raama’s birth was not unknown to Sage 
Viswaamitra. And he knew too the powers of the weapons he had 
given to Raama. Still the actual fact when experienced is something 
more than expectation. Sage Viswaamitra was happy beyond words, 
and his face glowed like a flame. He then thought of the service that 
he still had to do for Raama. This was the prince’s marriage with 
Seeta. 

The rishis assembled there said to Raama : “We intend pro-" 
ceeding to the kingdom of Videha where, in the capital city of Mithila, 
Janaka the illustrious philosopher king intends to perform a great 
sacrifice. 

“All of us are going there and it will be good if you and the 
prince, your brother, accompany us. It is meet and proper that the 
Prince of Ayodhya should see the marvellous bow in the court of 
Janaka.” 

So it was decided, and Raama and Lakshmana went with 
Viswaamitra to Janaka’s city. 



CHAPTER VI 


SEETA 

Janaka, king of Mithila, was an ideal ruler. He was a much-revered 
friend of Dasaratha who, when he planned his j yaaga for progeny, 
sent not mere messengers but ministers to Mithila to invite King 
Janaka. 

Janaka was not only a brave king but was as well-versed in the 
Shaastras and Vedas as any rishi and was the beloved pupil of Yaajna- 
valkya whose exposition of Brahmajnaana to him is the substance 
of the Brihadaaranyakopanishad. In the Bhagavad Gita, Sri Krishna 
cites Janaka as an illustrious example of the Karma yogin. Janaka 
was thus worthy to be the father of Seeta who was to be the wife of 
Vishnu come down on Earth in human form. 

Desirous of performing a yaaga , Janaka at one time ploughed 
the chosen site. As usual this was done by his own hand. 

As the field was being cleared and levelled, Janaka saw among 
shrubs a baby divinely beautiful. Janaka was childless and accep¬ 
ted the infant as the goddess Earth’s gift to him. 

Taking the child in his arms he went to his beloved wife and said: 
“Here is treasure for us. I found this child on the yaaga site and we 
shall make it our own.” And she joyfully consented. NJ 

The beauty of the goddess Earth mortal eyes cannot see in its 
fulness, but we get glimpses of it as we gaze with grateful hearts on 
the emerald green or golden ripeness of spring-tide or autumn fields, 
or with awe and adoration on the glories of mountain and valley, 
rivers and ocean. This loveliness was Seeta in its entirety. Kam- 
ban would have it that Seeta’s beauty threw into the shade Lakshmi 
herself who came up with Nectar as the Ocean of Milk was being 
churned. This child of divine beauty was brought up by King Janaka 
and his dear queen. 

When Seeta reached the age of marriage Janaka was sad that 
he would have to part with her. Though he tried hard, he was for 
long unable to choose a prince worthy of Seeta. Many kings came 
to Mithila, seeking Seeta’s hand, but m Janaka’s view none of them 
was good enough. The King anxiously thought over t}ie matter 
and came to a decision. 

Long ago, pleased with a yaaga performed by Janaka, Varuna 
presented to him Rudra’s bow and two quivers. That was an ancient 
neavenly bow, which no ordinary man could even move. This was 
kept by him as an honoured heir-loom. Since only a very 



34 


RAAMAAYANA 


exceptional man could be considered worthy of Seeta, Janaka issued 
this proclamation: “Seeta, my daughter, will be given in marriage to 
the prince who can lift, bend and string the bow of Siva which Varuna 
gave me and to none other.” 

Many princes who had heard of Seeta’s beauty, went to Mithila, 
pnly to return disappointed. None could fulfil the condition. 

Led by Viswaamitra, the rishis from Siddhaashrama were pro¬ 
ceeding to Mithila, with bullock-carts transporting their luggage. 
The animals and the birds in the aashrama set out to follow Viswaa¬ 
mitra, but he gently bade them stay behind 

It was evening when they reached the river Sona. There they 
rested for the night, Viswaamitra recounting to Raama and Laksh- 
mana the history of the place. Getting up in the morning, they con¬ 
tinued their journey and crossed another river, not very deep, and 
by noon they were at the Ganga. 

They bathed in the holy river, and the rishis made lustrations 
to their forebears. They improvised an aashrama there, performed 
their pujas and cooked their food. Meal over, they sat round Vis¬ 
waamitra who, at the request of the two princes, told the story of the 
Ganga. 

Himavaan, king of mountains and his spouse, Manorama, had 
two daughters, of whom Ganga was the elder. Himavaan sent her to 
the land of the Devas in response to their request and she dwelt with 
them. Uma, the younger, won the favour of Siva and became his 
spouse. 

Sagara, a former king of Ayodhya, had no son for long. With 
his two wives, Kesini and Sumati, he went to Himaalaya and per¬ 
formed tapas. Sage Bhrigu, pleased with the king, blessed him and 
said: “You will get a number of children and will acquire undying 
fame. One of your wives will give birth to an only son, and through 
him your lineage will be continued. The other queen will tfear sixty 
thousand strong-armed sons.” 

, Sagara’s wives bowed low before the sage and asked which one 
of them would get an only son and which the sixty thousand children. 
Sage Bhrigu asked each of them their own desire. 

Kesini said she would be satisfied with one son who would con¬ 
tinue the line; Sumati chose the other alternative. “Be it so,” said 
the sage. 

Satisfied, the king and his wives took leave of the sage and re¬ 
turned to Ayodhya. In course of time, Asamanjas was born to Kesini; 
Sumati gave birth to a fissiparous mass which divided out into sixty 
thousand babies. This army of children was well taken care of by 
nurses. 



SEETA 


35 


Years rolled by; and while the sixty thousand grew into strong, 
handsome princes, Asamanjas turned out to be a cruel lunatic. He 
indulged in the pastime of throwing little children into the river and 
laughed merrily as they struggled and died. 

Naturally people hated this maniac and banished him from the 
country. To the great relief of all, Asamanjas’ son, Amsumaan, 
was the opposite of his father and was a brave, virtuous and amiable 
prince. 

King Sagara launched a great horse-sacrifice and prince Amsu¬ 
maan was in charge of the sacrificial horse, but Indra, in the guise 
of a Raakshasa , managed to carry of the animal. The Devas re¬ 
garded yaagas by mortals as a challenge to their superiority, and lost 
no opportunity of throwing obstacles in their way. If, however, all 
obstruction was overcome and the yaaga was completed, they accepted 
offerings made to them. And then he who performed the yaaga 
got due reward. 

The king was greatly upset when he heard that the sacrificial 
horse was stolen. He sent out the sixty thousand sons of Sumati 
to go in search of the animal all over the earth and to spare no pains 
to retrieve it. 

“The loss of the horse,” he impressed on them, “not only means 
obstruction to the yaaga ; it casts sin and ignominy on all concerned. 
You should, therefore, recover the horse, wherever it may be kept 
hidden.” 

Eagerly the sons of Sagara proceeded to search the entire earth, 
but the horse was nowhere to be found. They even started digging 
the earth as for buried treasure, and in their anxiety respected neither 
place nor person and only succeeded in earning the hatred of all they 
met. The horse was not to be found; and when they reported their 
failure to the King, he bade them ransack the nether world also. 

The princes did as they were told and in Paataala they saw the 
horse grazing in a comer of an aashrama , not far from the place 
were Sage Kapila who was Vishnu sat in meditation* 

The princes at once jumped to the conclusion that they had not 
only found the stolen horse but the thief also, and they rushed on 
Kapila shouting, “Here is the thief pretending to be a yogi .” 

Kapila thus disturbed opened his eyes and the sixty thousand 
princes were reduced to a heap of ashes. Indra, the real thief, had 
artfully left the horse here with this very intent. 



CHAPTER VH 


BHAGEERATHA AND THE STORY OF GANGA 


King Sagara waited in vain for the return of the princes who had 
gone in search of the sacrificial horse. 

After some days he called his grandson, Amsumaan, and said: 
“I am anxious to know what has happened to the princes who went 
to Paataala. You are brave; go thither, well-armed, find out what 
has happened and come back crowned with success.” 

Amsumaan went closely following the path of the princes and 
reached the nether world where he saw and paid salutations to the 
mighty elephants standing guard at the four quarters. These guar¬ 
dians of the quarters uttered encouraging words and said he would 
succeed in his mission. 

When in due course Amsumaan entered and went round Paataala 
he was delighted when he found the sacrificial horse grazing con¬ 
tentedly there, but was perplexed and distressed when he saw heaps 
of ashes all over the place. Could they be all that remained of his 
valiant uncles? 

Garuda, the bird-king, brother of Sumati, Sagara’s second wife, 
who chanced to be there told Amusumaan: “Those ash-heaps are all 
that is left of the sixty thousand sons of Sagara who were consumed by 
the wrathful glance of Sage Kapila. Dear child, take the horse 
and complete the yaaga. If these ashes are to be watered according 
to custom so that the souls of the princes may rest in peace, Ganga 
should be brought down here from the land of the Devas.” 

Amsumaan rushed home with the horse and told the king all 
that he had found and learnt. 

Sagara was immersed in sorrow at the fate that had overtaken 
his sons. However, the horse having been brought back, he completed 
the yaaga. Grieving over his lost sons and despairing of ever bring- 
ging Ganga down to the nether world, he died disconsolate. 

According to the Raamaayana , Sagara lived for 30,000 years. 
Figures like 30,000 and 60,000 need not confuse us; ‘thirty-thousand’ 
may mean either a very large number or just thirty. If we so like, 
we may take these figures literally. 

Amsumaan succeeded Sagara as King of Ayodhya and was, in 
turn, succeeded by Dileepa. Bhageeratha came after Dileepa. 

Amsumaan and Dileepa, though happy and blessed in other 
respects, died grieving that they were unable to bring Ganga to Paa¬ 
taala for the salvation of their forefathers. 



BHAGEERATHA AND THE STORY OF GANGA 


37 


Bhageeratha was a valiant king. He was childless. Desiring 
progeny and hoping to bring Ganga down, he left for Gokarna for 
performing penance, leaving the kingdom in the hands of his ministers. 

Bhageeratha went through severe austerities. With fire on all 
sides and head exposed to the hot sun, and taking food but once a 
month, he continued his tapas. Bhageeratha’s name has come to 
signify great perseverance in any good cause. 

Brahma, pleased with rhe tapas , appeared before Bhageeratha and 
asked: “What would you have?” 

Bhageeratha told him his two wishes: “If you have pity on me, 
bless me with a child to continue the line of my forebears. Secondly, 
cursed by Kapilamuni, my ancestors lie a heap of ashes in Paataala. 
The ashes should be washed by the waters of Ganga so that their 
souls may ascend to heaven. May you be pleased to order Ganga to 
go down.” 

Brahma replied: “The Devas are pleased with your tapas. 
Your wishes are granted. But there is one difficulty. The earth 
cannot withstand the force of Ganga’s descent; Siva alone can stand 
it. Therefore direct your penance and prayers to him.” 

Bhageeratha renewed his tapas and continued long without food 
or water, and at last won Siva’s grace. Siva appeared and said to 
Bhageeratha: “I shall fulfil your wish. I shall receive Ganga on 
my head. May her grace be upon you.” 

When Mahaadeva promised help to Bhageeratha, Ganga began 
her descent as ordered by Brahma. In her arrogance, she thought 
she would fall on Mahaadeva’s head and sweep him away towards 
Paataala. 

The three-eyed God decided to teach Ganga a lesson. And the 
moment he willed it, the flood of waters that fell on his head were 
held by his matted hair as in an infinite receptacle. Ganga tried her 
best but not a drop could emerge from the tangled maze of Siva’s 
matted locks. 

This was a lesson to Ganga to be sure, but a heart-breaking dis¬ 
appointment to Bhageeratha. There was nothing for him but to 
propitiate Siva with tapas . This he did to such good purpose that 
Siva took pity on him and gently let out the waters of Ganga in Bindu 
Saras from where they flowed down in seven small separate 
streams. 

Three of them flowed west and three east; and the seventh river 
followed Bhageeratha who was full of joy at the approaching salvation 
of his ancestors, 

Ganga followed Bhageeratha’s triumphal chariot; the waters 
danced and shone like lightning flashes as the river made its course 



38 


RAAMAAYANA 


and the Devas and Gandharvas assembled above to witness the 
grand sight. Sometimes slow and sometimes fast, now sliding 
down and now jumping up, the river went on dancing behind Bhagee- 
ratha’s chariot and the folk of heaven enjoyed the sight all the way. 

On her course, Ganga damaged the yaaga platform of a rishi 
by name Jahnu. The rishi took the entire flood in his palm and 
sipped it off. Ganga disappeared again and Bhageeratha was sorely 
perplexed. 

The Devas and other rishis approached Jahnu and begged him 
to forgive Ganga and allow Bhageeratha to reap the fruit of his great 
austerities and perseverance. The sage relented and let Ganga out 
through his right ear. The Devas were glad and blessed Ganga 
thus : 44 Coming out of the rishi’s body as out of your mother’s 

womb, you are now Jaahnavi, Jahnu’s daughter.” 

There was no further hindrance or mishap and Ganga reached 
Paataala through the ocean. With the holy waters, Bhageeratha 
performed the funeral rites for his ancestors and secured for them 
their entry to heaven. 

Bhageeratha’s efforts having brought Ganga down, she is known 
as Bhaageerathi. 

After concluding this narrative, Viswaamitra blessed the princes. 
44 The sun is setting,” he said. 44 Let us say our evening prayers 
in the waters of Ganga whom your ancestor brought down to this 
world.” 

Those who bathe in the holy waters of Ganga or read or listen 
to this divine story with devotion, will be cleansed of sin and endowed 
with virtue, strength and unflagging zeal. 


chapter vm 

AHALYA 

After a day’s stay in the city of Visaala, Viswaamitra and his party 
left for Mithila. On the way, not far from Mithila, they saw a 
beautiful aashrama which seemed untenanted. Raama asked Viswaa* 
mitra : 44 Whose is this aashrama with ancient trees ? Why does 
such a beautiful abode stand deserted ?” 

Viswaamitra replied : 

44 This aashrama is subject to a curse. Sage Gautama lived 
here with his wife Ahalya, spending his days in peace and holy 
meditation. One day during the sage’s absence from the aashrama f 
Indra, filled with unholy desire for the beautiful Ahalya, entered it 



AHALYA 


39 


disguised as Gautama and approached the lady with urgent solicita¬ 
tion. She was not deceived by the impersonation, but vain of her 
beauty and proud that it had won her the love of the lord of the 
celestials, she lost her judgment and yielded to his desire. 

“ When the sin had been sinned, realising its heinousness and the 
fierce spiritual energy of her betrayed husband, she warned Indra 
of his terrible peril and begged him to be gone in the instant. 

“ Indra was fleeing in guilty panic ; but unfortunately for him 
he almost bumped into the rishi who was just returning from his 
ablutions, clad in wet garments and radiating spiritual lustre. Pretence 
was hopeless before that all-seeing wisdom and Indra bowed in abject 
supplication, and threw himself on the mercy of the rishi. The sage 
looked at him with wrath and loathing and cursed him : 4 Lustful 

beast as you are, dead to all truth and righteousness, may your 
manhood fall away from you.’ 

“ Indra at once became a eunuch and went back to the Devas 
in ignominous shame. 

“ Then the sage turned to his erring wife and prescribed a long 
penance for her. He said : 4 Living on air, you shall stay here, 

unseen by anyone. After a long time, Dasaratha’s son will pass 
this way. When he sets foot in this aashrama , you will be freed from 
the curse. Welcome him as a guest. You will then recover your 
lost virtue and get back your own beauty.’ 

44 The sage then left his violated aashrama for Himaalaya to 
engage himself in austerities there.” 

Viswaamitra said to Rama : 44 Let us enter the aashrama . 

You will bring redemption to Ahalya and re-kindle the light in her 
as the sage promised.” 

And they went into the aashrama . As Raama set foot in the 
aashrama , the curse was lifted and Ahalya stood before them in all 
her beauty. Having lain concealed behind leaves and creepers and 
kept her vow for many years, she now shone, says the poet, in Raama’s 
presence, like the moon emerging from the clouds, like a flame issuing 
from smoke and like the sun’s reflection in rippling water. 

Raama and Lakshmana touched the feet of the sage’s wife made 
pure by penance. She welcomed the divine princes with all the 
customary rites of hospitality. A shower of flowers descended from 
the heavens as Ahalya, cleansed of sin, shone like a goddess ; simul¬ 
taneously the sage Gautama returned to the aashrama and received 
his repentant and purified wife back to his affection. 

That is Ahalya’s story as told by Vaalmeeki. There are in 
other Puraanas and popular stories slightly varying versions, but 
the differences need not trouble us. 



40 


RAAMAAYANA 


Now, a word to those of our times who read Raamaayana and 
Bhaarata and other Puraanas. In these works, there are frequent 
references to Devas and Raakshasas. The latter were wicked, had 
no regard for dharma , and revelled in evil deeds. Asuras were also 
like Raakshasas . But even among Raakshasas there were a few 
wise and virtuous people. There spring up bad men even in the best 
of races and vice versa. On the whole, Asuras and Raakshasas 
were those who rejoiced in doing wicked deeds. It is a pity that 
some people in their ignorance identify the Asuras and Raakshasas 
with ancient Indian tribes and races—a view not supported by any 
literary work or tradition or recorded history. 

The conjecture of foreigners that the Raakshasas were the 
Dravidian race, is not borne out by any authority in Tamil or other 
literature. The Tamil people are not descendants of the Asuras or 
Raakshasas . 

The Devas were generally upholders of dharma and took on 
themselves the task of putting down the Raakshasas. According 
to the Puraanas, they had at times to deviate from dharma in dealing 
with the Raakshasas, some of whom had attained great power through 
tapas. 

The Devas were generally good ; and those among them who 
swerved from the path of righteousness paid the price for it. There 
was no separate code of conduct for the Devas ; the law of karma 
admits of no distinction between the Devas and others. The law 
dealt with the Devas as with others. 

Wedded to virtue as the Devas generally were, lapses on their 
part appear big to us, like stains on white cloth. The Raakashasas* 
evil deeds are taken for granted and do not attract much attention, 
like stains on black cloth. 

The honest, when they happen to go astray, should evoke our 
sympathy. It is however the way of the world—but it is not right— 
to condemn in strong terms casual lapses of the virtuous, while 
tolerating habitual wrong-doers. 

It should be noted that in the Puraanas we see the gods getting 
entangled in dilemmas of dharma . Indra and other Devas are shown 
often as committing serious sins. Why did the sages who told the 
Puraanas involve themselves in such difficulties ? Their aim was to 
awaken people to a sense of the dangers of adharma. Else, the sages 
need not have deliberately attributed sinful acts to their own heroes 
and created difficulties for themselves. 

Some persons take pleasure in jumping to wrong conclusions 
from the incidents in the Puraanas. They argue : “ Raavana wak 
a very good king. Vaalmeeki has falsely accused him of wicked 



RAAMA WINS SEETA’S HAND 


41 


deeds." They ask : “ Did not Raama act unjustly on a certain 

occasion ? Did not Seeta utter a lie ?” and the like. 

Vaalmeeki could well have omitted incidents which are not 
edifying. Both Raama and Raavana were first presented to us by 
the poet Vaalmeeki. There was no earlier work referring to Raavana 
that can be quoted to contradict Vaalmeeki and stamp him as being 
partial to Raama, Seeta and the Devas, and twisting facts to deceive 
people. Vaalmeeki’s Raamaayana is the fountain source of the 
stoiy of Raama ; in it, one comes across seemingly wrong deeds. 

Calm consideration of such situations would show that they 
are just portrayals of similar difficulties In our day-to-day life. It 
is for us to benefit from the moral trials contained in them. The 
lesson of the Ahalya episode is that, however deadly one’s sin, one 
may hope to be freed from its consequence by penitence and punish¬ 
ment. Instead of condemning others for their sins, we should look 
within our own hearts and try to purify them of every evil thought. 
The best of us have need for eternal vigilance, if we would escape 
sin. This is the moral of Ahalya’s error. 


CHAPTER IX 

RAAMA WINS SEETA’S HAND 

All arrangements for Janaka’s yaaga had been completed and to 
Mithila had come many rishis and Braahmanas from various king¬ 
doms. Viswaamitra and the princes were duly welcomed. Janaka’s 
preceptor, Sataananda, was the first to pay honour to Viswaamitra ,* 
Janaka followed him. 

The king said to the sage : “I am indeed blessed that you 
should attend my yaaga ", 

Pointing to Raama and Lakshmana, Janaka asked Viswaamitra : 
a Who are these god-like youths who resemble each other, and carry 
their weapons with the proud ease of seasoned warriors ? Who is 
the happy father of such sons ?** 

Viswaamitra told Janaka that they were the sons of King 
Dasaratha. He narrated how they had protected his own yaaga 
and destroyed the Raakshasas. “ They have come here,” the sage 
went on, 44 to see, if they may, the great bow of Rudra in your palace/’ 
Janaka understood the meaning of Viswaamitra’s words and rejoiced. 

The king said; 44 The prince is welcome to see the bow. If 
he can string it, he will win the hand of my daughter. Many were 
. the princes who saw this bow and went back, unable even to move it* 



42 


RAAMAAYANA 


I shall indeed be happy if this prince succeeds where so many have 
failed and I am thereby enabled to give Seeta to him.” 

Janaka then ordered his men to bring the bow which was kept 
safe and sacred in an iron box. It was brought on an eight-wheeled 
carriage and dragged like a temple chariot during a festival. 

“ Here,” said Janaka, “ is Rudra’s bow worshipped by me and 
my ancestors. Let Raama see this bow.” 

After obtaining permission from Viswaamitra and the king, 
Raama stepped out to the iron bow-case, while all eyes were fixed 
on him in wishful expectation. Opening the box, he lifted the bow 
effortlessly, as if it were h garland of flowers, and resting one end 
of it against his toe, he bent and strung it and drew the string back 
with such irresistible force that the mighty bow snapped with a crash 
like a clap of thunder. And there fell from heaven a shower of 
flowers. 

Janaka proclaimed : “ My beloved daughter shall be wedded 

tp this prince.” 

Viswaamitra said to Janaka : “ Send your swiftest messengers 

to Ayodhya to give the news to Dasaratha and invite him.” 

Janaka’s messengers reached Ayodhya in three days. They 
met King Dasaratha who was seated, like Indra, on his throne and 
said to him : “ Sage Viswaamitra and King Janaka have sent you 

happy news. Your son who came to Mithila has won our princess 
Seeta by fulfilling the condition set for her hand. He not only strung 
Rudra’s bow which none before could so much as lift, but bent its 
tough pride till it broke. King Janaka eagerly awaits your gracious 
consent for the marriage, and your presence and blessing at the 
festivities. May it please you to start for Mithila with your 
retinue.” 

Dasaratha, who had sent Raama with Viswaamitra with a 
heart not altogether free from anxiety even after the sage’s assurance, 
was thrilled with joy on hearing this good news. He told his ministers 
to prepare for the journey and left the very next day for Janaka’s 
capital. 

Dasaratha and his following reached Mithila and were received 
with enthusiastic welcome. Exchange of courtesies over, Janaka 
said to Dasaratha : ** My yaaga will soon be over. I think it best 
to have the marriage as soon as the yaaga is over,” and sought his 
approval. Dasaratha replied : ” You are the bride’s father and 
it is for you to order things as you wish.” 

At the appointed day and hour, giving away the bride. King 
Janaka said to Raama : ” Here is my daughter, Seeta, who will 
ever tread with you the path of dharma. Take her hand in yours. 



parasuraama’s discomfiture 


43 


Blessed and devoted, she will ever walk with you like your own 
shadow : 

“ I yam Seetaa mama sutaa 
sahadharmacharee tava 
prateechchh chainaam bhadram te 
paanim grihneeshwa paaninaa 
pativrataa mahaabhaagaa 
chhaaye vaanugataa sadaa” 

This sloka is uttered in every wedding in upper India when the 
bride is given away. 

Thus was Seeta given by Janaka to Raama. Were they not 
Eternal Lovers re-united ? And so they rejoiced like lovers come 
together after separation. 


chapter x 

PARASURAAMA’S DISCOMFITURE 

Having thus safely handed back to Dasaratha at Mithila the princes 
entrusted to him in Ayodhya, and after attending the wedding cele¬ 
brations, Viswaamitra took leave of the two kings and went to Himaa- 
laya. In the story of Raama, Viswaamitra has no further part. 

Viswaamitra may be said to be the foundation of the grand 
temple of Raama’s story. After Raama’s wedding in Mithila, we 
do not see him again. It should be noted that characters who play 
a leading role in one canto of Vaalmeeki almost fade out in subsequent 
cantos. Viswaamitra who dominates the Baala Kaanda does not 
appear again. Similarly, Kaikeyi and Guha are prominent only in 
Ayodhya Kaanda. The same thing can be said of Bharata whom 
we do not come across in the chapters intervening between the Chitra- 
koota meeting and Raama's return to Ayodhya. The poet hardly 
brings Bharata before our eyes during the period of Raama’s distress. 
The characters in Vaalmeeki Raamaayana (unlike those in the Mahaa- 
bhaarata and in ordinary plays and novels) do not present themselves 
off and on. Critics should bear this general characteristic of Vaal- 
meeki’s epic in mind. 

King Dasaratha returned to Ayodhya, accompanied by his 
retinue. On the way, there were bad omens and anxious Dasaratha 
asked Vasishtha what they portended. Vasishtha replied that there 
was no need to be alarmed, for though the birds in the air indicated 
approaching trouble, the animals on the land promised a happy 
consummation. 



44 


RAAMAAYANA 


As Dasaratha and Vasishtha were thus conversing, there broke 
out a great storm ; trees were uprooted ; the earth quaked and clouds 
of dust went up and hid the sun and there was an all-enveloping 
darkness. Everyone was terror-struck. Soon they knew the reason 
for the strange phenomenon. There stood before them the awe¬ 
inspiring figure Parasuraama, the sworn enemy of Kshatriyas, with 
a bow on one shoulder and a battle-axe on the other, and with an 
arrow shining like lightning in his hand. Terrible in appearance, 
with his matted locks gathered overhead, he looked like Rudra exul¬ 
ting in the destruction of Tripura. His face emitted flame-like 
radiance. The son of Sage Jamadgani struck terror among Kshatriyas, 
many generations of whom he had annihilated. Wherever he went 
he was preceded by storm and earthquake. And the Kshatriya 
race trembled in fear. 

The Braahmanas in Dasaratha’s retinue said to one another : 
“ Because his father was killed by a king, Parasuraama took a vow 
to destroy the Kashatriya race. We dared to hope that his vengeful 
wrath had been quenched in the blood of the innumerable kings 
he has slain. Has he again started his cruel campaign ?” However, 
they honoured him with the customary offering of water. After 
receiving it, Parasuraama addressed himself to Raama : 44 Son of 
Dasaratha, I have heard of your prowess. I was somewhat surprised 
to learn that you strung the bow in King Janaka’s court and that you 
drew the string till the bow broke. Here is my bow, equal in all 
respects to the one that you broke. This is the bow of Vishnu which 
was entrusted to my father. If you are able to string this bow, you 
will be worthy of my battle.” 

Dasaratha was perturbed at this turn of events and he begged 
that his son Raama should be spared the trial. He said to Parasu¬ 
raama : 44 You are a Braahmana. We have heard that, satiated 
with your revenge, you have gone back to tapas as becomes your 
order, in pursuance of your plighted word to Indra, after giving 
away the earth you had conquered to Kaashyapa. Is it proper that 
you should break your vow, and seek to injure a prince of tender 
years who has done you no wrong, and who is dearer to us than life ?” 

Parasuraama heard him unmoved without so much as looking 
at him, and addressed himself solely to Raama, as though the others 
did not exist: 44 Viswakarma originally made two exactly similar 
bows. One of them was given to Rudra and the other to Vishnu* 
This is the one given to Vishnu. What you are said to have strong 
and bent to breaking point was Siva’s bow. See if you can string 
this bow of Vishnu ; and if you do, it will be proof of your skill and 
strength and I will then honour you by fighting with you.” 



parasuraama’s discomfiture 


45 


Parasuraama spoke in a loud and arrogant tone. To hiin 
Raama replied in courteous manner, yet in firm tones : “ Son of 
Jamadagm ! You have been vengeful because your father was killed 
by a king. I do not blame you for that. But you cannot put me 
down as you have humbled others. Please give me your bow.” 

So saying, he took the bow and arrow from Parasuraama. He 
strung the bow and setting the arrow to it, drew the string. Addres¬ 
sing Parasuraama, he said with a smile : “ This mighty Vaishnava 
arrow placed on the string cannot be put back idly. It must destroy 
something. Tell me, shall it destroy your powers of locomotion, 
or would you rather that it consumes the fruits of your tapas ?” 

As the son of Dasaratha strung the bow of Vishnu, the glory 
on Parasuraama’s face faded, and he stood, no longer the warlike 
conqueror, but a self-subdued rishi, for the purpose of the Parasu¬ 
raama avataar was over. 

Parasuraama said mildly to the Prince of Ayodhya : “ I realise 
who you are. I am not sorry that you have quenched my arrogance. 
Let all my tapas go to you, But because of my promise to Kaashyapa, 
I cannot remain in his domains and have therefore to hurry back to 
the Mahendra mountains before the sun sets. Let me use my power 
of locomotion for this single thing. Subject to this, let the arrow 
which you have set to the bow consume all my power earned through 
tapas." 

So saying, Parasuraama went in reverent circumambulation 
round the Prince and departed. 

Ayodhya’s citizens were over-joyed to hear that Dasaratha and 
the royal princes were returning to the capital. The city was festive 
with flowers and shone like the deva-loka. 

Raama and Seeta lived happily in Ayodhya for twelve years. 
Raama had surrendered his heart to Seeta. It was difficult for one 
to say whether their love grew because of their virtues or it was planted 
in their beauty of form. Their hearts communed even without speech. 
Seeta, rejoicing in Raama’s love, shone like Lakshmi in heaven. 

Long afterwards, when their forest-life began, Anasooya, the 
great sage Atri’s holy wife, extolled Seeta’s love for Raama. And 
Seeta answered: “ How else could it be ? Raama is a perfect 
being. His love for me equals mine for him. His affection is un¬ 
changing. Pure of heart, he has mastered the senses.” 



CHAPTER XI 


FESTIVE PREPARATIONS 


Raama and Seeta spent twelve happy years in Ayodhya. But now 
the Lord and His consort in human form have to experience the hard¬ 
ships, sorrows and conflicts of life on earth. 

As Bhagavaan himself explains : “ Whatever avataar I assume, 
my play must go through the feelings and experiences appropriate 
to that incarnation.” 

Who was the Prince of Ayodhya who through his body, life 
and experience, suffered the sorrows of mankind and saved the gods ? 
The ever-present, all-pervasive Being who rules the world from within 
and without. 

Kamban, the Tamil poet, begins the Ayodhya Kaanda referring 
to this marvel of how the King of Kings allowed himself to suffer 
the cruel machinations of the hunchback maid-servant and of a step¬ 
mother, which deprived him of the sceptre and banished him to the 
forest and beyond the sea. 

Dasaratha loved all his four sons and yet he had a special 
affection for Raama. And the latter deserved it by his royal qualities 
and adherence to dharnta . Queen Kausalya—like Aditi, the mother 
of the gods—was proud that she had such a son as Raama. 

Vaalmeeki has filled pages with the tale of Raama’s virtues. 
The muni is never satiated drinking from the ocean of Raama’s quali¬ 
ties. He describes Raama’s gifts and graces sometimes directly, 
sometimes as seen and admired by others ; thus and in many other 
ways he dwells on the qualities that made Raama the ideal man. 

Raama’s graceful frame and virile beauty, his strength, his 
courage, the purity of his heart, his perfect life, his compassion, 
sweetness of speech, his serenity, his deep wisdom and his states¬ 
manship were admired by the people and made them eagerly look 
forward to his becoming king. 

And Dasaratha knew and rejoiced in this expectation. Hence, 
considering his old age, he wished to crown Raama as Yuvaraaja i 
and entrust him with the de facto rule of the kingdom. Informmg 
his ministers of his desire, he had the Raaja Sabha convened. Rishis 
and wise men, leaders of the city and kings from neighbouring lands, 
attended the Raaja Sabha . When all were seated, each in his appro¬ 
priate place, Dasaratha rose and addressed them. 

His deep manly voice, like the sound of a trumpet or the roar 



FESTIVE PREPARATIONS 


47 


f rain-bearing clouds, filled the great hall. A royal radiance shone 
,'om his face. His words were full of meaning and charmed all ears. 

44 Like my ancestors, I have tended this kingdom as a mother 
cares for her child. I have worked unremittingly for the people. 
Now my body is old and infirm. I wish therefore to appoint my 
eldest son as Yuvaraaja and transfer to him the burden of responsi¬ 
bility. Following the holy custom of my forefathers, I hope to spend 
the rest of my life in austerities in the forest. Raama is fully equal 
to the task of kingship. He is expert in administration and state¬ 
craft and he is unequalled in valour. I can transfer this trust of 
sovereignty to him without any anxiety and I hope that this honoured 
assembly will permit me to do so.” 

Shouts of joyous acclaim rose from the great assembly and with 
one voice the gathered princes and notables exclaimed : “ So be it.” 

The King spoke again : 44 You agree with my proposal but 
give no reason. This will not do. Let the wise men explain why 
they agree.” 

Then several speakers rose and explained Raama’s virtues and 
fitness to rule. The King’s heart was filled with joy to hear these 
praises of Raama. 

At last the whole assembly rose and said with one voice : “ Let 
there be no delay. Let Raama be anointed Yuvaraaja” 

The King answered that he was happy and would forthwith 
carry out their wishes. Then turning to Visishtha, Vaamadeva 
and the other holy men and guardians of the sacred rites, he said : 
44 This is the auspicious month of Chaitra, the season when the trees 
in the forest are covered with flowers. Revered elders, make all 
preparations for the anointing of Raama.” 

The assembly was glad to hear these prompt orders. As bidden 
by the King, Sumantra, the minister in charge of the household, 
went to fetch Raama. Raama, ignorant of ail these happenings, 
came and stood before his father. 

Hearing of the decision to anoint him Yuvaraaja, he humbly 
bowed acceptance, saying, 44 1 am in duty bound to carry out your 
orders, whatever they be.” 

Dasaratha blessed Raama and said : 44 You are a good prince 
beloved of the people. Let not your courtesy and your consideration 
flag but increase with your opportunities of doing good, and earn 
you enduring glory.” And Raama returned to his dwelling. 

Hardly had Raama returned home when Sumantra called in 
haste and told him that his father wished to see him. Asked for 
the reason, Sumantra could not tell; he only knew he had been 
enjoined to fetch the prince at once. 



48 


RAAMAAYANA 


Raama thought : “ The King must have taken counsel over the 
coronation ceremony and perhaps met with some difficulty. But 
whatever happens is for the best.” Raama was not eager to assume 
authority, but looked on it as only a duty to be done. If the King 
wanted him to take it up, he was ready to do so. But if the King 
wanted him to give it up, he was equally willing. In this mood, 
Raama went to his father. 


chapter xn 

MANTHARA’S EVIL COUNSEL 


The King embraced Raama, seated him beside him on the throne 
and said : ** I am old ; I have enjoyed my life as a man and a king. 
I have discharged all my duties to my ancestors. There is nothing 
left for me to do. 

“ My only desire is to install you on the throne of our fathers. 
Last night I had bad dreams. Those who read the future advise 
me that a great sorrow, even death, may overtake me very soon. 
Hence I wish to have the coronation performed tomorrow. Tomor¬ 
row, the readers of the stars say, is auspicious. Something within 
me says, ‘ Do this at once.’ You and Seeta should prepare for to¬ 
morrow’s anointment by fasting tonight. Lie down on a bed of 
darbha grass and have trusty and vigilant friends to look after your 
safety. It seems to me that the present time when Bharata is away 
is particularly opportune for your installation. Not that I do not 
know that Bharata is the soul of righteousness in thought and conduct 
alike, and that he is devoted to you, but the minds of men are changeful 
and open to unexpected influences.” 

And so the King decided that the coronation should be performed 
on the very next day and told V^sishtha of his decision. Bad dreams 
added to the reasons for fixing the day of the coronation at once. 

Taking leave of his father, Raama went to KausaJya’s apartment 
to give her the news and seek her blessing. But the Queen had heard 
the news already. Sumitra, Seeta and Lakshmana were all there 
with Kausalya, who, clad in ceremonial white, sat offering 
prayers for her son. 

Raama reported to his mother the King’s latest command. She 
oaswered : “ This I have heard. May. you live long. Be a good 
ruler. Conquer your foes and protect your subjects and kinsfolk- 
You have pleased your father and you haye made me happy,** . 



manthara’s evil counsel 


49 


Then bidding farewell to his mother and step-mother, Raama 
went to his own apartment. As directed by the King, Vasishtha 
came to Raama’s place. He was welcomed by him at the entrance. 
Vasishtha initiated Raama with due mantras in his pre-coronation 
fast. 

As Vasishtha returned to the King, he saw groups of people on 
the royal road, cheerfully discussing the great festival of the morrow. 
Houses were being decorated witn flowers, festoons and flags. It 
was with difficulty that Vasishtha could make his way through the 
crowds to the King’s palace. The King was pleased to hear that the 
fast had begun duly and all was being got ready for the ceremony. 

But in his heart of hearts there was a fear that some mishap 
might come between him and his one wish. 

The city was in a joyous commotion of expectancy. In every 
house, in every street, men, women and children looked on the coro¬ 
nation as a great and auspicious occasion in their own lives and awaited 
it with enthusiasm. 

Raama and Seeta in their dwelling meditated long on Naaraa- 
yana, fed with ghee the sacrificial fire, and reverently sipped what 
remained of the ghee , and slept on grass spread on the floor. 

Early the following morning, they were roused from slumber 
by music and held themselves in readiness to proceed to the palace 
and in expectation of the auspicious call. 

But the summons that came was of an entirely opposite nature. 

In accordance with the practice in royal households. Queen 
Kaikeyi had a woman companion and confidential servant. She 
was a hunch-back named Manthara. Being a distant relation of the 
Queen, she claimed great intimacy with her. 

Manthara is one of the best known characters in the Raamaa - 
yana . Every man, woman and child in our land knows and detests 
her, as the cause of Raama’s exile, Dasaratha’s death and all the 
sorrows which befell the royal family. 

On the day on which Dasaratha summoned the Assembly and 
decided to anoint Raama as Yuvaraaja , Manthara happened to climb 
up to the terrace of the women’s apartments and stood surveying the 
town below. She saw the streets were sprinkled with water and gaily 
decorated. Flages flew from the house-tops. Wearing new clothes 
and bright jewels, smeared with sandal paste and decked in flowers, 
people moved about in crowds, engrossed in- happy talk. Musical 
instruments played in the temples. 

Manthara could not understand the reason for all this, for she 
did not know what the King had decided. Some celebration was on* 
•he guessed. 



50 


RAAMAAYANA 


Manthara turned to a servant and asked her : 44 Why are you 

wearing this silk dress ? What is on in the City ? Kausaiya seems 
to be distributing gifts to Braahmanas. She is a thrifty lady and 
would not be doing this for nothing. There are festive sights and 
sounds everywhere. Do you know what all this is about ?” 

The little servant girl answered, dancing with joy : “ Why, do 

you not know that our Raamachandra is going to be anointed 
Yuvaraaja tomorrow morning ?” 

This was news ! Manthara was overpowered with sudden 
anger. Quickly she hobbled downstairs. Straight she entered 
Kaikeyi’s room. Kaikeyi was resting on her bed. 

“ Rise, rise, foolish woman ! A flood of misfortune is rising to 
drown and swallow you ! You are betrayed and ruined. Your sun 
is setting. Foolish girl, is this the time to sleep ?” 

Kaikeyi, fearing that some calamity had overtaken Manthara, 
asked her gently : “ What is troubling you ? Why are you thus 

upset ?” 

And the clever Manthara began : 44 Destruction has come upon 

both you and me, my girl. Dasaratha has decided to make Raama 
Yuvaraaja —the real ruler of this land. What greater cause for 
sorrow need I have ? When grief comes to you, how can I remain 
unconcerned ? I have come running to you. You were born and 
bred in a royal family. You were married into a royal family. 
Now, alas, all is over. 

44 Like the simple woman you are, you have been deceived. 
Your husband has cheated you with sweet words. It is a deep plot, 
as any one can see. He put Bharata out of the way by sending him 
to the distant place of his uncle, and is taking advantage of his absence 
by hurriedly crowning Raama. By tomorrow it will all be over. 
And you watch all this, lying in bed and doing nothing, while you 
and all who depend on you are being destroyed.” 

And so, Manthara went on talking. Kaikeyi’s ears heard the 
words without quite heeding their drift. Like the rest of the royal 
household her mind was overwhelmed now with the joyous expectation 
of Raama’s coronation, for she loved and esteemed Raama like 
everybody else. 

44 Manthara, you have brought me good news,” she said. 44 Is 
my son Raama to be crowned tomorrow ? What greater joy can 
come to me? Here, take this. Ask me for anything else.” So 
saying, Kaikeyi took the necklace off her neck and gave it to Man- 
thara. It was a royal custom at once to reward with a rich gift the 
bringer of any important good news. 

Kaikeyi thought Manthara, like any other officious personal 



manthara’s evil counsel 


51 


attendant, was ingratiatingly jealous in her mistress’s interests. 
How could this woman understand the goodness of Raama, or affairs 
of State ? And so she thought her foolish fears would be banished 
If she saw that her mistress was happy at the event. Kaikeyi’s mind 
was still uncorrupted. She had the culture of her noble lineage and 
was not easily amenable to low thoughts. 

This but increased Manthara’s grief. She flung away the neck¬ 
lace and said : “ Woe to you, stupid woman. All is lost and stupidly 

you laugh with joy. How can you be blind to the misfortune that 
is coming to you ? Am I to laugh or cry at this folly ? Your rival, 
Raama’s mother, has conspired to making him king. And you jump 
with joy. Insane woman ! What would be Bharata’s state when 
Raama reigns ? Would not Raama fear and ever look upon Bharata 
as a dangerous enemy ? Raama knows human nature. He knows 
that Bharata alive would be a constant threat to his power and there¬ 
fore must be killed. Does not one kill a cobra out of fear ? Here¬ 
after there is no security for Bharata’s life. Tomorrow morning 
Kausalya will be a happy woman and you will bend before her as a 
well-dressed slave. You will stand before her, hands clasped in 
obedience. From tomorrow your son too will be a subject and a 
slave. In these apartments there will be no more honour or joy.” 

And she stopped, unable for grief to continue. Kaikeyi heard 
all this and wondered. “ Why should Manthara have such fears ? 
Does she not know Raama ? Is he not dharma embodied in human 
form ?” 

She said : 44 Manthara, have you not known and rejoiced in 
Raama’s truthfulness, right conduct and humility ? He is the elder 
prince and he gets the kingdom. Bharata will get it one day after 
him. What is wrong with all this ? Why, dear friend, do you feel 
such grief? After Raama, Bharata will reign for a hundred years. 
Do not cry. You know how affectionate Raama is to me. Indeed 
he cares for me more than for his own mother. Does not Raama 
hold his brothers as dear as life ? It is not right that you should 
fear any harm from Raama.” 

“ Alas, Alas !” said Manthara. 44 Why are you so foolish ? 
Once Raama is crowned king, what chance has Bharata ? Do you 
not know the rule of succession ? When Raama ascends the throne 
all prospects of royalty for Bharata and his line are at an end. After 
Raama, Raama’s son will be king, and after him that son’s son will 
be king, and so the succession will go on. Eldest son succeeds eldest 
son. There is no chance for a younger brother, no matter how good 
or manly he is. My dear, you know not even this. What is one 
to do ?” 



52 


RAAMAAYANA 


“ Once Raama is crowned,” she continued, “ he will not leave 
Bharata alone. There will be danger to Bharata’s life. If you 
want Bharata to live, advise him to remain away, an exile from home ; 
for if he returns he will be coming to his death. It would be safest 
for him to leave even his uncle’s house, and hide his head in obscurity 
in some more distant land. 

“ And Kausalya is no friend of yours. She bears you a grudge 
because you are the King’s favourtie and have often slighted her. 
And now she is sure to wreak vengeance on you. You know the 
wrath of a rival wife is a raging fire when it finds its chance. You 
may take it that, if Raama is king, Bharat^ is as good as dead. There¬ 
fore, think hard. Be firm. Decide something and stick to it. Some¬ 
how Bharata must be crowned. Raama must be banished from the 
kingdom.” 

Fear now entered the heart of the Queen. Manthara won. 
Kaikeyi’s face was flushed ; her breath became hot. Helpless she 
clung to Manthara for comfort and safety. 

Because his first two wives had borne no children, Dasaratha, 
following the royal custom, married Kaikeyi. At that time Kaikeyi’s 
father secured from Dasaratha the promise that the child of her 
womb should become king after him. In such a promise given by a 
childless king there was nothing surprising and nothing wrong. At 
that time, his then queens had long been childless. The King took a 
third wife for the sake of progeny. Even then his wish for a son to 
be bom was not fulfilled. Many years passed. 

After the great sacrifice was performed, all the three wives bore 
children. The son of the Queen Eminent, Raama, was the eldest 
among four sons. He was also great in virtue, fully equal to the 
burden of kingship, acceptable to ministers, citizens and vassal 
princes. How could Dasaratha violate the royal custom and ignoring 
Ramma’s claim anoint Bharata ? 

Moreover, neither Bharata nor Kaikeyi had ever thought of or 
wished for the fulfilment of this old and forgotten promise. During 
all the intervening years, no word had been spoken on this subject* 
Hence the King thought there could be no difficulty in installing 
Raama as Yuvaraaja in accordance with the custom of the dynasty 
and public expectation. And there was no cloud in Kaikeyi’s mind 
This is clear from Kaikeyi’s behaviour. And Bharata was too good 
and noble to raise a question. 

And, yet, as Dasaratha told Raama, even the purest of minds 
is mutable. When fate conspires with bad counsel, any one of its 
might be corrupted. And this happened to Kaikeyi. The gods in 
Heaven had received an assurance, and the sages had performed 



KAIKEYI SUCCUMBS 


53 


tap as, for the destruction of Raavana. What we call destiny, there¬ 
fore, ordained that Kaikeyi’s pure heart should be changed by 
Manthara’s evil counsel. So says Kamban in the Tamil Raafnaa - 
yana in his own inimitable style. 

Fearing that delay might bring some unpredictable obstacles, 
Dasaratha had ordered the coronation to be done without waiting 
for Bharata’s return to the capital. This same fear and hurry were 
used by Manthara to persuade Kaikeyi to take the wrong path. 
“ Think, my Queen. Why this haste ? Why does your husband 
rush through the ceremony when your son is absent ? Is it not to 
cheat him of his right ? Is not the motive plain ? The King pretends 
to be enamoured of you. But this is only his hypocritical shrewdness.” 

Thus tempted, Kaikeyi thought over Manthara’s advice. 
Kaikeyi was weak like any other woman. She had good feeling 
and good culture, besides a keen intellect. But she had little know¬ 
ledge of the world. She was also terribly obstinate. Easily deceived, 
she did not have the power to foresee the full consequences of her 
action. Thus began the chapter of grief in the Raamaayana . 


chapter xm 

KAIKEYI SUCCUMBS 

Kaikeyi, who had looked upon Raama as her own son, was enmeshed 
in Manthara’s arguments and became helpless. 

“ Indeed, I am afraid,” she said. “ Tell me what we should 
do. Am I to be a servant to Kausalya ? Never. Bharata must be 
crowned. You are quite right. And Raama must be sent to forest* 
But how shall we get all this done ? Tell me. You are clever and 
know the way.” 

And she clung to Manthara. In Kaikeyi’s eyes at that time 
Manthara’s crooked frame appeared handsome. This is not a joke ; 
it is a subtle psychological phenomenon. 

This is indeed strange, Kaikeyi,” said Manthara. “ Is it for 
me to tell you how this could be brought about ? Have you really 
forgotten ? Or, are you only pretending ? But if you want me to 
say it, I shall do so. Listen.” 

And then she paused. Kaikeyi, all impatient, cried : ” Tell 
me, tell me. Somehow Bharata must be crowned and Raama’s 
coronation must be stopped.” 

44 Very well,” said Manthara, 44 1 shall tell you. Do not be 
itapatient. You remember how your husband Dasaratha, long ago. 



54 


RAAMAAYANA 


fought against Sambara in the South ? And you were with him, were 
you not ? Your husband went, did he not, to help Indra ? Sambara 
of Vaijayanti was too powerful for Indra, who sought Dasaratha’s 
help. Did not Dasaratha get wounded in battle and lose conscious¬ 
ness ? Then, you drove his chariot skilfully out of the battle-field, 
gently removed the arrows from his body and revived him and saved 
his life. Have you forgotten all this ? 

And what did he tell you then ? He told you in gratitude : 
* Ask me for two boons. I shall give you anything you want.’ Then 
you answered : ‘ I shall ask for my boons later. I want nothing 
now.’ Then he promised, did he not, ‘ You will have your two gifts 
whenever you want them *? You told me all this long ago yourself. 
You may have forgotten it, but I have not. The time has arrived 
to get him to redeem his promise. 

“ Demand that he should crown Bharata instead of Raama. 
This will be the first of the two gifts he promised. For the second 
gift, ask that Raama be sent to the forest for fourteen years. 

“ Do not be frightened. Do not fear to ask. Do not think 
it sinful to demand this. Do what I tell you. It is only if Raama 
is sent into the forest that his hold on the people will relax and dis¬ 
appear in course of time and your son’s position will be secure. 

“ Go now and lie down in the sulking room. Throw away your 
fine dress and your jewels, wear an old saree and stretch yourself on 
the floor. When the King enters the room, do not speak to him. 
Do not even look at him. I am sure he cannot endure your sorrow. 
You will then have your way with him. 

“ The King will try to get round you. Do not yield. He will 
offer many alternatives. Accept none of them. Insist on the two 
booms. Be firm. 

“ Bound by his promise the King will finally come round. I 
know how passionately he loves you. He would give up his life 
for your sake. To please you he would jump into fire. Do what I 
tell you. Do not be afraid. 

“ Unless Raama is sent to the forest, your wish will not be fulfilled. 
Raama must be sent away. Only then the position you get for Bharata 
will be real and lasting. Remember this. Mind you do not weaken.” 

Listening to this exhortation, Kaikeyi’s face shone with hope. 

What a brain you have, Manthara,” exclaimed Kaikeyi. “ You 
have been the saving of me.” And she jumped about in joy like a 
filly. 

Manthara repeated again and again that Raama must be sent 
to the forest. “ Do not delay. What needs to be done, do at once. 
It is no good strengthening the tank-bund after the waters have 



KAIKEYI SUCCUMBS 


55 


flown out. Remember what I have told you. Everything depends 
on your firmness. Victory is yours if you do not yield.” 

Kaikeyi assured Manthara of her firmness and forthwith entered 
the sulking room, removed her jewels and scattered them on the floor, 
changed her clothes and stretched herself on the floor. Then, assu¬ 
ming a broken voice, she said : 

“ Manthara, you will yourself carry the news to my father Kekaya.. 
You will yourself tell him one of two things : either that Bharata 
is to be crowned or that Kaikeyi is dead. My dear, dear Manthara !”* 

Kaikeyi in her anger believed that Dasaratha had really been 
treacherous to her. Even then, stretched on the ground divesting; 
herself of all ornaments and putting on a face of grief and anger, 
she looked inexpressibly beautiful. So great was her beauty. 

The sinful thought had found lodgment in her mind and her 
whole nature was transformed. The fear that she would lead a 
slave’s life, and that even Bharata’s life was in peril, had got hold 
of her. For the first time in her life she cast aside the sense of shame 
and sin and hardened her heart. Heaving heavy sighs, perspiring, 
and with eyes closed, Kaikeyi, beautiful like a Naga goddess, un¬ 
braided her hair and lay on the floor with dishevelled tresses and 
sprawling like a bird shot down by a hunter. The flowers and shining, 
jewels, which once adorned her person, lay scattered in the dark room 
like stars in the midnight sky. 

Having dismissed the Assembly and given orders for the due 
celebration of the coronation ceremony, Dasaratha, relieved of care 
and wishing to relax, sought the apartments of his favourite consort. 
He had decided on the coronation of Raama after receiving the 
approval of all those who had a right to be consulted and he felt 
happy and free, as after laying down a heavy burden. 

He entered Kaikeyi’s chamber to tell her the happy news and 
spend in pleasant talk the night before the coronation. The junior 
queen’s residence was a beautiful palace with* lovely gardens and 
tanks, birds playing in the water and peacocks dancing with tails 
spread out and trees resplendent with bright flowers. In Dasaratha’s 
happy mood it appeared unusually beautiful that night. 

Like the full moon rising brightly before an eclipse, without 
knowing of the eclipse that lies in wait for her, the poor old King, 
entered Kaikeyi’s dwelling with a beaming face. 

The incense pots and drinks were in their usual places but he 
did not see the Queen whom he was eager to meet. Of all his consorts 
Kaikeyi was the one whose company he sought for joyous relaxation 
from all cares of state, for she never interfered in public affairs, and 
always waited for him at the entrance and welcomed him with a warm 



56 


RAAMAAYANA 


embrace* But, today, she was nowhere to be found* 

The King was perplexed. He went round and looked in vain 
for her in all her favourite haunts thinking that she was playing a 
sweet game of hide and seek. He did not find her. 

This sort of thing had never happened before ! He asked a 
maidservant where the Queen was. Folding her hands in reverence, 
the girl said : 44 Lord, the Queen is angry. She is in the inner 

chamber.” 

The surprised King entered the room. And he saw a sight 
which amazed and distressed him, for there she lay on the bare floor, 
with draggled robes and dishevelled hair, like one in mortal pain. 
She seemed too full of anguish even to look at him as he entered. 

The poor guileless King, all unconscious of having given any 
cause for offence, behaved with the doting fondness of an old husband 
and seating himself by her on the floor stroked her hair and strove 
to console her with loving words and caresses : 

“ What has come over you ? Are you ill ? Do you feel any 
pain ? Have I not the best doctors in the land ? I shall send for 
them at once. They can cure any malady. Do not be afraid.” 

Kaikeyi sighed heavily, but would not speak. 

The King proceeded : 44 Was anyone in the palace guilty of 
discourteous behaviour ? Tell me and I shall punish him. Did 
anyone slight you or was there anything you wanted which I neglected 
to give you? Tell me.” 

In this way, he mentioned faults that might have occurred in 
the running of a big house and asked her what the matter was and 
why she was upset. Kaikeyi paid no attention to his questions and 
was mute like one possessed. 

The King begged her more importunately : 44 State your wish. 
It shall be done. Do you want anyone punished ? I shall punish 
him. Do you want anyone freed from punishment ? I shall free 
him, even if he be* a murderer. 

44 You know my absolute authority. I can give and I can take, 
as I please. Anywhere, to anyone, I can do what I wish. Ask me 
anything and it shall be done at once.” 

Kaikeyi sat up. The King was pleased. And she began ; 44 No 
one slighted or dishonoured me. But there is something which you 
can do and you must do it for my sake. Give me your word that 
you will fulfil my desire. Then I shall tell you what it is.” 

Hearing this, the unsuspecting old man was filled with joy. 
Possessing absolute powers, he had no doubt that he could fulfil 
her wishes whatever they were, and so boldly and joyously he said ; 
“Well, Kaikeyi, tell me your wish. It shall be done, f sweat it 



KAIKEYI SUCCUMBS 


57 


I swear it on all I love most—on you, the dearest among women, 
and on Raama, dearest to me among men ! I swear in the name of 
Raama : whatever you desire, I shall do. I promise. I swear.” 

Guileful wickedness and trustful misfortune were reaching the 
climax in their unequal encounter. The King’s swearing in the name 
of Raama filled Kaikeyi with supreme delight. She was now sure 
that she had won, for the King would never break a promise coupled 
with that beloved name. 

44 Do you promise ? Very well !” she exclaimed. 44 Swear 
again in the name of Raama that you will do what I wish without fail. 
Swear it !” 

The King said : 44 My beloved queen. I promise. I swear it 
on Raama. Whatever you wish I shall do. This, is my sworn word.” 

At this stage, as she thought of the tremendousness of her in* 
tended request, Kaikeyi’s heart misgave her and she feared that on 
hearing it her horror-stricken husband would exclaim—God forbid 1 
No oath or promise is strong enough to justify so heinous a sin !— 
and recoil from her with abhorrence. 

She stood erect and with folded hands, turning in the four direc¬ 
tions, invoked in a solemn voice the heavenly powers to witness 
and confirm the oath : 44 Oh, Ye Gods ! You have heard and 
witnessed the promise given to me by my husband. Sun, Moon and 
Planets, you are my holy witnesses. Ye, Five Elements ! You 
have heard the promise. He who has never broken his word, my 
husband, has sworn to do my wish. Bear witness to this.” 

Dasaratha was looking at her with hungry, joyous eyes. She 
knew her man and she began boldly : 44 Do you remember, King, 
how, when long ago in the field of battle you were about to lose your 
life, I drove your chariot in the dark night, took you out of the battle* 
field, removed the arrows from your body and comforted and revived 
you ? When you came out of your faint, you said something, did 
you not ? 

44 You said : ‘You have restored to me the life which my foes- 
had taken from me. I shall give you any two gifts you ask.’ Then 
I said : ‘ I want nothing now. It is joy enough now for me that you 
are alive. I shall ask for my gifts later.’ Do you remember this ?” 

The King answered : 44 Yes, I do remember this. Ask for your 
two gifts. You shall have them now.” 

Kaikeyi said : 44 Remember you have made a vow. You have 
given a pledge. You have sworn in the name of Raama. The gods, 
and the five elements have witnessed your promise. I shall state my 
wishes. Your ancestors never broke their word. Prove yourself 
their worthy descendant by being true to the word you have given.. 



58 


RAAMA A Y ANA 


With the preparations now afoot for the coronation, crown my son 
Bharata. This is my first wish. The second boon that I demand is, 
send your son Raama to live in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years. 
Remember your solemn vow which you cannot break. The good 
name of your great dynasty is in your hands.” 


CHAPTER XTV 

WIFE OR DEMON ? 

Dasaratha was thunder-struck. 

When his mind resumed its function, he doubted the reality of 
•what had happened. “ Could it be other than a hideous dream ? 
Or the phantasmagoria of a disordered brain ? Or the sudden mate¬ 
rialisation of the sins of some past birth called up for my chastise¬ 
ment ? I am certainly the victim of an illusion. I cannot believe 
this to be reality.” 

Unable to stand the confused agony of shapeless terrors, he closed 
his eyes and became unconscious. Opening his eyes a little later, 
they fell on Kaikeyi and he trembled like a stag at the sight of a tiger. 
He. sat up on the floor and moaned, swaying helplessly this side and 
that like a cobra held by the spell of a potent charm. Again he 
•swooned. 

After a long interval, he recovered his senses and, with eyes 
turned to his tormentor and inflamed with helpless anger, cried out : 

O wicked ogress ! Destroyer of my dynasty ! What harm has 
Raama done to you ? Has he not looked upon you as his own 
mother ? I thought you were a woman. I now see you are a veno¬ 
mous serpent brought from far away and cherished in my bosom only 
to sting me to death !” 

Kaikeyi was unmoved and spoke not a word. 

The King went on : “On what pretext can I banish Raama, 
whom all the people love and praise ? I may lose Kausalya and 
survive. I may lose the pure-minded Sumitra and survive. But if 
I lose Raama, I cannot live thereafter. Without water, without 
sunlight, I may live for a while, but never without Raama. Expel 
from your mind this sinful thought. With my head bowed at your 
feet, I beg of you. Have you not said many a time, ‘ Two dear 
sons I have. And of them Raama, the elder, is dearer to me ’? In 
deciding to crown Raama, what have I done but carry out in action 
your unspoken wish ? Why then do you demand these cruel boons ? 
No, no, it cannot be really that you mean this. You are only testing 



WIFE OR DEMON ? 


5 $> 


me to find out if I indeed love your son Bharata. Do not, through at 
great sin, destroy our famous line of Kings.” 

Even then Kaikeyi spoke no word, but her eyes blazed with 
scornful anger. 

The King continued : “ Till this day you have done nothing: 
to cause me sorrow, never spoken an unworthy word. Who has 
corrupted you now ? I cannot believe that this evil thought is your 
own. How often have you told me, my dear, that, noble as Bharata 
is, Raama is nobler still ? Is it the same Raama that you now want 
to be sent to the forest ? How can he dwell in the forest ? How* 
can you even entertain the thought of his going away into the wilder¬ 
ness infested by ferocious beasts ? How lovingls has Raama treated 
you and served you ! How can you forget all this and steel your 
heart and utter the words, 4 Send him to the forest’ ? What fault 
has he committed ? Of the hundreds of women in the palace, has. 
anyone ever uttered a word against his honour or virtue ? The whole 
world loves him for his great and good qualities. How did you alone 
among so many find cause to dislike him ? Is not Raama like Indra 
himself? Is not his face radiant with goodness and spiritual light 
like a rishi’s ? The whole world praises his truthfulness and friendli¬ 
ness, his learning and wisdom, his heroism and humility. No one 
has heard a harsh word from his lips. How can I his father say to 
him 4 Son, go to the forest’ ? This can never be. Have mercy oik 
me, an old man nearing the end of his days. Kaikeyi, ask for any¬ 
thing else in this kingdom, ask for everything else, and I will give. 
With folded hands, I beg you, do not send me to Yama. Clinging: 
to your feet I beg you, I beg you humbly, save Raama ! Save me 
from sin !” 

To the King thus struggling in a sea of grief, pitiless Kaikeyi 
spoke cruel words : 

44 King, if having promised the boons you regret it and will be 
forsworn, what sort of king would you be and what right would 
you have to speak of satya and dharma ? How can you face other 
kings ? Will you shamelessly confess to them, 4 Yes, Kaikeyi saved 
me from death and I gave her a promise. Later, I was sorry I gave 
it and I broke it* ? What else could you tell them ? All monarchy 
will shun you as a disgrace to their order 1 And common people 
will laugh in scorn at their rulers and say, 4 Kings break promises 
even when given to their queens. Do not expect kings to keep their 
word/ Do you not know that Saibya, to redeem the pledge he gave 
to a bird, cut the very flesh off his bones and gave it away ? Have 
you not heard of Alarka who plucked his eyes out to keep his word ? 
The sea stays within its limits and does not overflow the land, becuase 



RAAMAAYANA 


*0 

it feels bound by its agreement. Do not violate your solemn pledge. 
Follow the path of your royal ancestors. O, I fear that you, their 
unworthy descendant will forsake dharma ; you will crown Raama 
and you will dally with Kausalya. What do you care what happens 
to dharma ? What do you care what happens to satya ? If you 
deny me the gifts you promised on oath, I shall this very night drink 
poison and end my life. You may anoint and install Raama, but 
before your eyes, O, promise-breaker, I shall be dead. This is 
certain. And I swear it in the name of Bharata. It will be well and 
good if you fulfil your promise and banish Raama to the forest. Else, 
I shall end my life.*’ 

With this firm declaration, Kaikeyi stopped. Dasaratha stood 
speechless, staring at his pitiless wife. Was this lovely creation really 
Kaikeyi or a demon ? Then, like a huge tree felled by a forester with 
his axe, the King shook and toppled down and lay stretched uncon¬ 
scious on the floor in pitiful ruin. 

Regaining his senses after a while, he spoke in a low voice : 
*“ Kaikeyi, who has corrupted your mind to see me dead and our 
race destroyed ? What evil spirit has possessed you and makes 
you dance in this shameless fashion ? Do you really think that 
Bharata will agree to be king after sending Raama to the forest? 
He never will, and you know it. Can I possibly bear to tell Raama 
to go to the forest ? Will not the kings of the world despise me, 
saying, ‘ This uxorious old dotard has banished his eldest son, the 
best of men !’ Don’t you see that they would laugh at me? It is 
easy enough for you to say ‘ Send Raama away to the forest,’ but 
can Kausalya or I survive his departure ? And have you thought of 
Janaka’s daughter ? Would it not kill her to hear that Raama is to 
go away to the Dandaka forest ? 

44 Cheated by your face I thought you a woman and took you 
for my wife. Like a deluded man, tempted by the flavour of poisoned 
wine, I was lured by your beauty into marrying you. Like a deer 
ensnared by a hunter, I am caught in your net and I perish. Like a 
drunken Braahmana in the streets I shall be universally despised. 
What boons have you demanded ? Boons that for ever will taint 
the fame of our dynasty with the ignominy of lustful dotage that drove 
an old fool to the banishment of a beloved and peerless son, 

44 If I tell Raama to go to the forest, yes, he will cheerfully obey 
and go to the forest. Myself and then Kausalya and Sumitca will 
die. How will you enjoy the kingdom thus secured, O sinful, foolish 
woman? 

44 And will Bharata agree to your plans ? If he does agree, he 
shall not perform my obsequies. O shameless woman, my life’s 



WIFE OR DEMON ? 


61 


enemy, kill your husband and attain widowhood to enjoy the kingdom 
with your son. O, how, sinful are women and how pitiless l No, no. 
Only this woman is cruel. Why should I insult other women? 
What a pity that my Bharata should have this monster for a mother ! 
No, I can never do this. Kaikeyi, I fall at your feet and beg you. 
Have some pity on me !’’ 

The King rolled on the ground and writhed in agony. What 
shall we say of this scene ? A great emperor, famous for his long 
and glorious reign, crying and rolling on the ground, clasping his 
wife’s feet and begging for mercy. It was like Yayaati, thrown back 
to earth when, his accumulated merit exhausted, he was ejected from 
Swarga. 

No matter how humbly he begged, Kaikeyi was obstinate and 
said firmly : “You have yourself boasted that you are a truth- 
speaker. But now having sworn before the gods that you have granted 
a boon, you attempt to retract your promise. If you break your 
word, I shall surely kill myself and that will not add greatly to the 
glory of your dynasty, of which you are so proued !” 

“ Very well, then,’’ said Dasaratha. “ Let Raama go to the 
forest and let me die. Having destroyed me and my race, a jubilant 
widow, you will gain your wish and seek joy in your life !’’ 

Again, after a while, the old King cried : “ What good you will 

gain by sending Raama to the forest, I fail to see. The only result 
will be that the whole world will despise you. After many years of 
prayer and penance, I had Raama by the grace of God. And him 
I now banish into the forest, I, most wretched of men !’’ 

Lifting his eyes to the sky, he said : “ Oh night ! stay on. For 

when you pass and day dawns, what shall I do ? What shall I say 
to those eager crowds, who, full of love for Raama, will be awaiting 
the coronation festivities ? O heavens ! stay still for my sake 
with your stars I No, no. Stay not, for then I must keep looking 
at this sinful woman. Depart at once, O night, so that I may escape 
this face,’’ 

This delirious and conscious by turns, the poor old man suffered 
agony—a king who had reigned for sixty-thousand years. 

“ Pity me, Kaikeyi,*’ he said. “ Forget the harsh things I uttered 
in anger. I beg you in the name of the love you bore me. You 
may take it that I have given the kingdom to you. It is yours. And 
you can give it with your own hands to Raama and see that the coro¬ 
nation goes through. The Raaja Sabha has decided and I have 
announced to the elders and to Raama that his coronation is to take 
{dace tomorrow. Let not this announcement become false. Have 
pity on me. Give the kingdom as your own to Raama. .The fame 



62 


RAAMAAYANA 


of this magnanimous gift will last as long as the world endures. My 
wish, the people’s wish, the Elders’ wish, Bharata’s wish—they are 
all that Raama should be crowned. Do this, my love, my life.”' 
Again the King clung to the feet of Kaikeyi. 

But she answered : “ Have done with this foolery, see that 
you do not break your word and drive me to keep mine, and kill 
myself. It is useless for you to try to evade.” 

The King said : “ With due rites and in the presence of Fire, 
I took your hand and called you wife. Here and now I renounce 
you, and with you the son you bore. Night is gone ; the dawn is 
near and the morning will see not Raama’s coronation, but my funeral.’* 

Kaikeyi cut him short : “You are prattling vainly. Send at 
once for Raama. Let him come here. Tell him the kingdom is 
Bharata’s and he should go to the forest. Keep your promise. Da 
not waste time.” 

Dasaratha groaned : “ Very well. Let me at least set eyes on 
Raama’s face. My death is near. Let Raama come. Let me see 
his face before I die. Tied down by dharma this old fool is helpless.” 

And again he fell unconscious. 


CHAPTER XV 

BEHOLD A WONDER ! 

Poor Dasaratha was in extreme agony, pulled by natural affection 
on one side and by the moral obligation to fulfil a pledge on the other. 
He had fondly hoped that Kaikeyi would relent and that somehow 
the conflict of duties would be resolved. But now he saw that this 
was not to be. 

He had still one faint hope : “ Raama is in no way bound by 
my promises and pledges. Strong as he is in people’s love and in 
his peerless prowess, he may disregard my promise, and stand on 
his own rights—but I cannot conceive his doing so, for my slightest 
wish has always been sacred to him. Yet, if by some chance he did 
so, it would save the situation.” 

In the confusion and anguish of his heart, the old King consoled 
himself with such false hopes, forgetting that Raama would never 
think of disregarding his father’s promise and that filial obedience was 
a fundamental rule of his life. 

But the false hopes did not persist long. He felt that his death 
was near. In this agonising conflict of duties, death would be a relief, 
and save him from the disruption and sorrows to come. / . ^ 



BEHOLD A WONDER ! 


63 


As death drew near, his mind recalled past events. He remem¬ 
bered a great sin committed by him in youth. He felt that he was 
now reaping what he then sowed : “ I killed the Rishi’s son and 
brought grief to his aged parents. How could this sin be wiped off 
except by my suffering the anguish of losing a dear son ?” Thus 
Dasaratha resigned himself to his fate as a just retribution for the 
wrong he had once done. 

He concluded that he had no alternative but to fulfil his word 
to his cruel wife and left the ordering of things entirely to Kaikeyi. 

Day dawned. The hour fixed for the coronation was approa¬ 
ching. The procession of Vasishtha and his disciples carrying the 
golden vessels containing the waters of holy rivers was coming towards 
the palace. The great street was decorated and was crowded with 
eager men and women. They rejoiced to see Vasishtha and his 
disciples march to the palace with the holy waters, and the para¬ 
phernalia of installation. As they saw the honey, curds, clarified 
butter, fried rice, sacred grass, flowers, maidens, elephants, horses 
and chariots, the white umbrella, the bull, the horse and the tiger-skin 
seat moving to the accompaniment of music from many instruments, 
the people made loud and jubilant acclamations which filled the air. 

Vasishtha, approaching the palace gate, saw Sumantra and 
said to him : “ Pray, go in at once and inform the King that the 

people are waiting, and all preparations are complete.” 

Sumantra approached the King’s bed-chamber and chanting 
the morning hymn, conveyed Vasishtha’s message. “Oh King,” he 
said, “arise from slumber to the hymn of your charioteer as the king 
of the gods does to Maatali’s waking songs. May all the gods be 
gracious unto you. The elders, generals, and chief citizens are 
waiting for your darshan. The goddess of night has withdrawn. The 
day’s work awaits your ordering. Oh King of kings, be pleased to 
rise. Holy Vasishtha and his men are waiting.” 

At that moment the King was speechless with agony, but Kai¬ 
keyi boldly answered for him and told Sumantra: “The King spent 
the night talking of Raama’s coronation and had no sleep. So now 
he is in a slumber. Go at once and bring Raama.” 

Thus the clever woman sent Sumantra to fetch Raama to convey 
the King’s command. She knew that Dasaratha had agreed but 
had not the strength to do what had to be done. Hence Kaikeyi 
resolved that she would herself do what needed to be done. 

Sumantra went to Raama’s palace. Seeta and Raama were 
getting ready for the coronation. Then Sumantra gave to Raama 
the message that the King and Queen Kaikeyi wanted his presence. 
Raama listened to obey. 



64 


RAAMAAYANA 


The unexpected delay and these strange goings and comings 
roused doubts, but no one dared to talk of them. The men concerned 
hoped that somehow things would turn out right and went on with 
their allotted work. 

The streets were brightly decorated; the great hour was approa¬ 
ching as in the Queen’s chamber strange and sinister events were 
developing. 

“Why this long delay?” the people wondered. “Perhaps the 
preliminary rites are more elaborate than we had thought.” 

The crowds in the steets grew bigger and bigger and more im¬ 
patient. 

Sumantra accompanied Raama to Kaikeyi’s palace, threading 
the way with difficulty through the throng. Raama entered the 
Queen’s apartment. As he stepped over the threshold, he started as 
if he had set his foot upon a snake, for he saw with awe-struck amaze¬ 
ment his father lying on the bare floor in anguish. The King evidently 
had been struck down with some great sorrow. His face was like 
a paarijaata blossom wilted in the sun. 

He touched his father’s feet and paid the same filial worship to 
Kaikeyi. 

Dasaratha uttered in a low voice the name of Raama and stop¬ 
ped. He could speak no more. He could not look straight into 
the face of Raama. 

Raama was perplexed and filled with apprehension at the sight 
of his father, lying there unable to speak, in the grip of some great 
agony—what it could be Raama could not even guess. He turned 
to Kaikeyi and said: “Mother, this is indeed strange. No matter 
how angry he was, my father would speak sweetly to me. Have I 
without knowing it offended him in any matter? Has some sudden 
sickness struck him down? Has someone spoken rudely to him? 
Do tell me what has happened. I can bear this suspense no longer. 

Bold Kaikeyi seized the chance and said: “The King is angry 
with no one. There is nothing wrong with his health. But there is 
something in his mind which he is afraid to tell you. That is all. 
He is afraid to say it to you, lest you should feel hurt. That is why 
he is silent. Once upon a time, pleased with me he offered, and I 
accepted, the gift of two boons. Now, like an uncultured person, 
the King regrets he did so. Is this worthy of him? Is it not un¬ 
becoming or si King to pledge his word and then regret it? You have 
the power to fulfil his promise, but he fears even to tell you of it 
and is thinking of violating it. Would it be right? If you assure him 
that he need not be anxious about your attitude and that he should 
keep his word at all costs, you will give him the necded etrength to 



BEHOLD A WONDER ! 


65 


behave righteously. You must give him the help he needs. The 
thing is in your hands. I shall tell you what it is, but after you pro¬ 
mise me that you will help the King to fulfil his pledge.” 

Raama, saddened at the thought that he should in any way be 
the occasion of distress to his father said to Kaikeyi: “Mother, am 
I indeed the cause of all this trouble? 1 do not deserve that you should 
have any doubts about me. If my father asks me to jump into the 
fire, I shall not hesitate to do it. If he asks me to drink poison, I 
shall drink it without hesitation. You know this. You know well 
enough that at his bidding I would drown myself in the sea. Here, 
mother, I give you my solemn promise that I shall fulfil the King’s 
promise to you, and I never break my word.” 

When Raama uttered these words, Kaikeyi exulted, for she knew 
she had conquered. The King for his part was in despair, seeing that 
ail escape was now barred. 

Thereupon the pitiless Kaikeyi uttered these terrible words: 
“Raama, your words are worthy of you. What higher duty has a 
son than helping fulfilment of the word his father has given? Now I 
shall let you know your father’s promise to me. When in the battle 
with Sambara your father was wounded, I rescued and revived him. 
Your father in gratitude for having been rescued by me when grie¬ 
vously wounded gave me two boons to be claimed and specified when 
I chose. I have claimed and specified them now. They are that 
Bharata should be anointed Yuvaraaja and that you should be sent 
away this very day to the Dandaka forest, to remain in exile for four¬ 
teen years. You have sworn solemnly to carry out his.promise to 
me, and now it is your duty to prove true to your pledged word. If 
you find right conduct as hard as your father did, that is another 
matter. Otherwise, listen to what I say. It is for you now to re¬ 
linquish the installation and to go out into exile with matted locks 
and hermit weeds, leaving the preparations now ready to serve for 
Bharata’s installation.” 

When she uttered these cruel words the King writhed in agony, 
but Raama heard her untroubled. Kaikeyi beheld a miracle. There 
was not the slightest sign of disapointment or sorrow in Raama’s face. 
Smiling, the Prince Said: “Is that all, mother? Surely, the King’s 
promise must be fulfilled. My hair shall be twisted and I shall 
wear the bark and I shall go this very day to the forest.” 

Kaikeyi spoke prophetic words when she said Raama’s duti¬ 
fulness would bring him glory undying. That glory will continue 
as long as the Himaalaya stands and the waters of Ganga flow and as 
long as the ocean-waves beat on the solid earth. 

Raama said to Kaikeyi, in unperturbed tones: “I am not in the 

B .—0 



66 


RAAMAAYANA 


least annoyed. Would I not be happy to give anything to Bharata? 
Ever if no one asked me, I would cheerfully give him my all. And 
how can I hold back a moment when my father commands it? What 
pains me a little is that father should have entertained any doubt about 
my willingness. Why should he have hesitated to tell me what he 
wanted and left it to you to say it to me? Am I not his son, bound to 
do his behest? What glory or what joy can I look for except to make 
good his word? How did I deserve it that my father should avert 
his face from me and refrain from speaking loving words to me? My 
grievance, if at all, is that he did not send for me straight and give me 
his command. I shall go to the forest this very day, with no regret. 
Send swift messengers at once to fetch Bharata home.” 

The Prince’s face glowed like a sacrificial fire bursting into flame 
as th eghee is poured into it. Kaikeyi felt glad at her apparent success. 
She could not look into the future and its sorrow, for what greater 
grief can come to a woman than the scorn of her own son? Greed 
deceived her into folly. It prevented her from understanding aright 
the mind of her own son Bharata. 

Like a captive elephant hemmed in on all sides, Dasaratha lay 
in anguish. With needless harshness, Kaikeyi hurried Raama, 
saying, “Do not wait for the King to speak and prolong the affair.” 

At this Raama said: “Mother, you have not, it seems, known 
me. I value no pleasure higher than to honour my father’s pledge. 
Let Bharata carry the burden of kingship, and look after our aged 
father. It will indeed give me the greatest joy.” 

Dasaratha, silent till now though listening intently, moaned aloud. 
Raama touched the feet of his father and Kaikeyi and hurried out of 
the chamber. 

Lakshmana had been standing outside. He knew what had 
happened and with eyes red with anger he followed Raama. On the 
way Raama saw the vessels holding the consecrated water for the 
coronation. He walked round them in worship. With calm majesty 
he left behind the white umbrella and other royal insignia and advised 
the crowds to disperse. The Prince, in whom Desire had been van¬ 
quished, went to the house of Queen Kausalya to give her the news and 
take her blessings before departing to the forest. 

Readers should exercise their imagination and build up in their 
own hearts the passions and sorrows of the persons figuring in this 
epic. Dasaratha’s anguish, Raama’s cheerful renunciation and the 
greedy passion of Kaikeyi which smothered all noble impulses—these 
are familiar phases in our daily lives. Vaalmeeki and ICamban saw 
with the vision of genius and made the events in Raama’s story live 
again in song. We f too, should see them through imagination. This 



STORM AND CALM 


67 


is the meaning of the traditi on that, wherever Raama’s tale is told, 
Hanumaan himself joins the gathering and reverently stands with 
tear-filled eyes, listening. 

May everyone that reads this chapter receive by Raama’s Grace 
strength to bear the sorrows that have to be faced in life. 


chapter xvi 

STORM AND CALM 

Raama went to Queen Kausalya’s dwelling. Many visitors were 
assembled there, eagerly awaiting the coronation. In the innermost 
apartment, the Queen, clad in white silk, was before the sacrificial 
fire invoking blessings on her son. 

As soon as Raama entered, she embraced him and showed him, 
who she thought was to become the Yuvaraa}a> to a specially raised 
seat. 

“Mother, this seat is now too high for me,” said Raama. “I 
am a hermit and should sit on grass spread on the floor. 1 have 
brought you news which may sadden you. Listen, and give me your 
blessings.” 

And he told her briefly what had happened: “The King wishes 
to give the crown to Bharata. His command is that I should spend 
fourteen years in the Dandaka forest. I must leave today, mother, 
and I come for your blessings before I go.” 

When Kausalya heard this, she fell on the ground like a plantain 
tree suddenly cut down. Lakshmana and Raama gently raised her. 

She clung to Raama and cried: “Is my heart made of stone or 
iron that I still live?” 

Lakshmana could not bear the sight of the Queen’s grief. Angrily 
he spoke: “This old King has pronounced on Raama a doom that 
is reserved for the most wicked evil-doers. What sin or crime has 
Raama committed? Not even his worst enemy could find any fault 
in Raama. The doting old man has lost his senses over his young 
wife and is not fit to be king any more. 

“How can a king listen to a woman and violate dharmal Even 
your enemies, O! Raama, when they look at you begin to love you, 
but this dotard of a father sends you to the forest. Look here, brother, 
let us together throw out this King and take charge of the kingdom 
ourselves. Who dare oppose us? I shall make an end of any one 
who dares. Only give me leave and I shall do this single-handed. 

44 A younger hrother to become King and you to go to the forest! 



68 


RAAMAAYANA 


The world would laugh at this absurdity. Don’t consent to this. I 
at any rate won’t stand this. I shall put down all opposition and see 
that you rule the kingdom without let or hindrance. Never doubt 
but I have strength to do it. Instead of the sun rising, a great darkness 
has descended upon the land this morning, for when we were ex¬ 
pecting you coronation the King sentences you to banishment! In 
the face of such injustice there is no use being nice and polite. I 
cannot stand this. I must do my duty. Mother, now you will see 
the strength of my arm and so you, brother.” 

Lakshmana’s words were* some solace to Kausalya, but yet this 
strange talk of ousting the King and seizing the throne frightened her. 

She said: “Raama, consider well what Lakshmanasays. Don’t 
go to the forest. If you go away, how can I stay here all alone among 
enemies? I too shall go with you.” 

Raama had listened in silence to Lakshmana’s outburst, for it 
was wise to let the pent up passion find outlet in words. Then, turning 
to Kausalya he said: “Mother, let there be no talk of anyone going 
with me to the forest. It is your duty to stay here serving the King 
and sharing the sorrow that has come to him in his old age. How 
can the crowned Queen of an Emperor wander with me like a widow 
in the forest? This cannot be. I shall return after my term of forest 
life. 

“It is my duty to fulfil my father’s word. It is all the same to me, 
whether it is just or unjust, spontaneous or extorted by force or fraud. 
If I fail in this primary duty, I can gain no satisfaction or good name 
through any amount of wealth or power. Lakshmana, your proposals 
are quite wrong. I know your great strength and I have no doubt 
that you can vanquish and destroy all opponents and secure for 
me the kingdom. I know also your affection for me. 

“But the way in which you propse to use it is not worthy of the 
dynasty to which we belong. Our highest duty is to fulfil our father’s 
word. If we fail in that, no other achievement can make up 
for it.” 

Raama tried to console both his mother and his brother, but 
Lakshmana’s anger could not be easily put down. Perhaps it could 
have been, if he himself—not Raama—were the sufferer. But it was 
Raama who was the victim of this cruel injustice. And so Lakshmana 
writhed in anger like a wounded cobra. Raama took him apart, 
made him sit down and tried to calm him: 

“Lakshmana, are you not my other self, my very soul in another 
body? Listen to me. You are courageous and strong. Control 
your anger and grief on my account. Don’t allow these evil spirits 
to possess you. Holding fast to dharma, let us convert our present 



STORM AND CALM 


69 


disgrace into a great joy. Let us forget all about the coronation, 
and think worthily as becomes our race. 

“Consider our father’s condition. Our hearts should go out to 
him in sympathy, for he is stricken with a great sorrow. Whatever 
be the reason, he gave a promise and if he should break it, he would 
be committing a shameful sin which would besmirch and blot out all 
his great and glorious deeds. He is heart-broken at the wrong he 
feels he has done me; but I do not feel it a wrong at all, for a king must 
keep his word and a son must obey his father. You should show 
that you too are free from any sense of injury. Only so can we bring 
him mental relief. 

“He gave us the life that we hold and we should give him peace 
of mind. He is afraid about the other world. We should free him 
from this fear. So far, we have never given him cause for sorrow or 
dissatisfaction. Now we have become the cause of a great fear in 
his mind about what is to happen to him in the other world. We 
can easily relieve him. Instead of doing this, are we to add 
to his troubles? For this reason my mind has altogether turned 
away from the coronation and is intent on the journey to the 
forest. 

“My sole desire now is to go to the forest and see that Bharata 
is crowned. This would please me best. If I delay, Kaikeyi will 
grow suspicious. Hence I should go to the forest this very day and 
bring peace to her mind. Rid of the fear of the sin of breaking a 
promise and assured of my willing and cheerful acceptance of his 
command, our father will be happy. 

“And we should not be angry with Kaikeyi either. Has she not 
been kind to us all these years? That she should suddenly conceive 
this idea is surely the working of fate. We should not blame her for 
it. One proposes something and fate decides otherwise. In this, 
Kaikeyi is but a passive instrument in the hand of fate. 

“Our little-mother will have to bear the grievous burden of the 
world’s blame, but our love for her should remain the same as ever. 
If, before this, there had been evil in her thought, her conduct would 
have shown it. There is no doubt that some higher force has made her 
say suddenly and harshly, ‘Raama, go to the forest.* Otherwise how 
could a high-minded woman who so far looked upon us as her own 
children now behave so brazenly before her husband? Who can oppose 
destiny? Even steadfast sages have swerved suddenly from their 
tapas. How can poor Kaikeyi hope to resist fate? 

“Let us reslove firmly to change this sorrow into joy. That 
would be a proof of our nobility and courage, Lakshmana. With the 
blessings of my mothers and eiders, I shall go to the forest. Bring 



70 


RAAMAAYANA 


here the water, the water from the Ganga for the coronation. * I shall 
use it for ablution before departing for the forest. No, no, that water 
belongs to the State and is intended for the coronation. How can we 
touch it? We shall go to holy Ganga ourselves and fetch the water 
for my ablution. Brother, be not sad thinking of kingdom or wealth; 
life in the forest will be my highest joy.” 

So Raama revealed to his brother his inmost thoughts. In these 
passages Vaalmeeki uses the word daiva. In Sanskrit literature, 
daivam means fate. Daivam , dishtam , bhaagyam , niyati and 
vidhi are all words conveying the idea of something unexpected 
and inexplicable. Because of the belief in God as the Prime Cause, 
a natural sonfusion arises between fate and God’s will. What Raama 
said to Lakshmana on the present occasion does not mean that he 
thought that the gods contrived Kaikeyi’s action for their own benefit. 
Raama offered no more than the usual consolation: “It is the work 
of fate. Do not grieve. No one is to blame for this.” 

In Kamba Raamaayana also, addressing his brother ‘raging like 
the fire of Dissolution,’ Raama says: “It is not the river’s fault that 
the bed is dry. Even so, my going hence is not the King’s fault, nor 
Queen Kaikeyi’s nor her son’s. The wrong is the work of fate. Why 
should one be angry then?” 

This explanation calmed Lakshmana for a while. But soon his 
anger boiled up again. He said “Very well, then. This is the work 
of fate. Fate, I grant, is the cause of our step-mother’s sudden folly. 
And I am not angry with her. But are we, on that account, to sit still 
and do nothing? It is Kshatriya dharma to overcome evil and esta¬ 
blish justice. 

“A hero does not bow down before fate. Having announced 
Raama’s coronation by beat of drum to the town and country, the 
treacherous King invokes some old forgotten boon and orders you to 
go to the forest. Is it manly to call this fate and obey it meekly? Only 
cowards go down under fate. Heroes should oppose and vanquish 
it. I am no weakling to yield to fate. You will see today the might 
of a hero matched against fate. I shall tame the mad elephant fate 
and make it serve me. 

“I shall banish to the forest those who conspired to banish you. 
If you wish to visit the forest for a change, you can do so later. The 
proper time for it will be when you have reigned as king for many years 
and then entrusting the crown to your sons. That was the way of our 
ancestors. If anyone questions your kingship now, I stand here to 
annihilate him. 

“Are these two shoulders merely for beauty? This bow, these 
arrows and this sword hanging on my side, are they mere decorations? 



seeta’s resolve 


71 


Or do you think they arc theatrical equipment put on for show? I 
await your orders. Give me the word and test my prowess.” 

Raama gently pacified Lakshmana’s rage which was flaming up 
into a conflagration. “As long as our parents are alive,” said Raama, 
“it is our duty to obey them. 1 cannot dream of disobeying my father. 
It is our prime duty to do his bidding and enable him to fulfil his 
pledge. What joy is there in getting a kingship after insulting our 
parents and slaying Bharata, the emodiment of dharmal" 

And he wiped with his hand the tears from Lakshmana’s eyes. 
When Raama did this, Lakshmana grew calm. For the affectionate 
magic of Raama’s hand could work wonders. 


CHAPTER XVII 

SEETA’S RESOLVE 

What took place in the inner apartments of the palace was not yet 
known to the town-people. But Raama for his part lost no time in 
preparing for forest life. 

He went to Queen Kausalya to receive her blessing before leaving 
the city. Kausalya said to him again: “How can I stay in Ayodhya 
after you are gone? It is best that I go with you to the forest.” Of 
course, she knew that her duty was to serve her husband in his old 
age and share his sorrow in Ayodhya. And yet her mind was now 
so confused by grief that she did not see things clearly. 

But Raama would not hear of it and put her in mind of her duty 
to be with the heart-stricken old King in his sad solitude. 

She recognised the justice of this counsel. She gave him her 
benedictions in sweet words ‘diluted with the salt of broken tears.’ 
“Do as your father has decreed and return in glory.” Raama put 
heart in her with a smile saying: “The fourteen years will pass 
quickly and you will see me back.” 

The poet says that, as Raama received his mother’s benedictions, 
his bright face glowed with added effulgence. How truly he pictures 
the sublime loveliness that <jomes of a great renunciation that 
illumines one’s being as with an inner light! 

We saw that Raama left Seeta and went to the King in answer 
to the message brought by Sumantra. Seeta was expecting Raama to 
return in a chariot with the royal umbrella, followed by a great retinue. 
But now she saw Raama return alone, unattended, with none of the 
royal insignia. And she noted on his face the glow of some fixed 
resolve. Raama was thinking as he came how he could break to his 



72 


RAAMAAYANA 


beloved the news that his father had decreed that he was to go to forest. 

“Something troubles the mind of my lord,” thought Seeta, 
“but what can anything matter so long as there is our love?” And 
she asked him. “What is the matter ? Why do you look so 
strangely?” 

Raama told the story briefly and then added “Princess, my 
love, I can well imagine your sorrow at having to part from me and 
stay here. Janaka’s daughter requires not my guidance to her 
duty. Be thoughtful of the comfort of the King and the three Queens 
—your mothers. Do not expect any better treatment than that given 
to the other princesses in the palace. Be respectful to Bharata who 
will be Ruler and guard against any offence to his feelings. Your 
love for me, I trust, will not grow any less during this absence. I 
shall return from forest after these fourteen years. Till then do not 
neglect customary rites and ceremonies. Mother Kausalya, in her 
sorrow will need your attentive care. Bharata and Satrughna are dear 
to me. You will look upon them as your brothers. Conduct your¬ 
self as befits your royal race and your own nature. Avoid extolling 
me so as to give possible offence to other good men. I must go to the 
forest today. Keep your mind steady and calm.” 

When Seeta heard this unexpected speech, her love for Raama 
manifested itself as anger that he should for a moment conceive that 
she could consent to part from him and live in comfort in the palace 
while he was a homeless wanderer in pathless forests. 

“A fine speech you have made, O Knower of dharma. It is to me 
a strange doctrine that a wife is diverse from her husband and that his 
duty is not hers, and that she has no right to shares in it. I can never 
accept it. I hold that your fortunes are mine, and if Raama has to 
go to the forest, the command includes Seeta also, who is a part of 
him. I shall walk in front of you in the forest ways and tread the 
thorns and the hard ground to make them smooth for your feet. Do 
not think me obstinate. My father and mother have instructed me in 
dharma . What you tell me is totally opposed to what they have taught 
me. To go with you wherever you go—that is my only course. If 
you must go to the forest today, then today I go with you. There is 
no room here for any discussion. Deb not think that I cannot bear 
forest life.With you by my side it will be a joyous holiday. I shall 
not be a source of trouble to you. I shall eat fruit and roots like 
you and I shall not lag behind as we walk. 

“I have long wished to go to the woods with you and rejoice in 
the sight of great mountains and rivers. I shall spend the time most 
happily among the birds and flowers, bathing in the rivers and doing 
the daily rites. Away from you, I do not care for Heaven itself. I 



seeta’s resolve 


73 


shall surely die if you leave me behind. I implore you to take me with 
you. Have pity on me. Do not forsake me now.” 

Beginning in anger, her speech ended in sobs. Raama explained 
to Seeta that life in the forests was not as easy as she thought and set 
out at great length the difficulties and dangers and again insisted that 
she should not think of accompanying him. 

Secta’s eyes filled with tears. “ Tigers, lions, bears, snake— 
none of them will come near me. They will flee from us at the sight 
of you. The sun, rain, wind and hunger and the spikes and thorny 
shrubs you speak of—I shall endure them all cheerfully. 

“I am not in the least afraid, and on the other hand you may be 
certain life will depart from this body if you leave me here and go. 

“When I was in Mithila,” she said, “the Braahmanas and astro¬ 
logers told my mother that I was destined to live in the forest for a 
while. Can I fulfil this prediction alone in ithe forest? Here is the 
opportunity for rre to fulfil it in your company which will make the 
forest a garden of delight. For whom is forest life unpleasant ? 
Only to those men and women who have not controlled their 
senses. You and I can be masters of our senses and miss nothing. I 
implore you, put me not away from you, for parting from you is 
more cruel than death.” 

There is a strength in supreme love which defies reason and laughs 
at death itself, and Raama suffered himself to be persuaded—partly 
because his love was as great as hers and every passionate word she 
spoke found ready lodgment in his heart, and partly because he 
was confident of his ability to protect her. It was settled that 
Seeta should accompany Raama to the forest. 

She sent for the poor and gave away all her belongings and pre¬ 
pared herself for life in the forest. Lakshmana also decided to go 
with his brother and be of service to him in the forest, and Raama 
had to agree. The three went to take leave of the aged King. 

In the streets and on the balconies were crowds of people looking 
on. Through the windows and from the terraces of mansions, men 
and women saw Raama and Lakshmana and the princess proceeding 
on foot, like the poorest in the land. 

’ Filled with boundless grief and indignation, the people said to 
one another: “What kind of a king is this who sends so noble a 
prince to the forest? And there Seeta walks, a princess that should 
command the service of the royal chariot. Can she bear the heat and 
the rain of the forest? This is monstrous! 

“We shall go then to the forest too. Let us gather up all we 
have and get away to the forest with these princes. The forest where 
Raama dwells shall be our Ayodhya* 



74 


RAAMAAYANA 


“Let these houses here henceforth deserted be^ infested with 
snakes and rats. Let Kaikeyi rule over the ruins of Ayodhya. Wild 
beasts and vultures of the forest will come to stay here. This will 
become a forest, and the forest will become Ayodhya.” 

Raama heard people talking thus, but took no notice. At the 
entrance to Kaikeyi’s palace, Raama saw Sumantra seated sorrow¬ 
fully aside in a corner. Raama tenderly spoke to him: “The three 
of us have come to meet the King. Sumantra, crave leave for us to 
enter his presence.” 

Sumantra went in accordingly to announce them to the King. 
What a sight met him there! Like the sun in eclipse, like an oven 
filled all over with ash, like a tank gone dry, the King was stretched 
flat on the floor, his glory gone and his face shrunken and distorted 
with anguish. 

Sumantra, his voice trembling with grief and his hands clasped 
together, said: “The Prince waits at the entrance and seeks audience 
to take your blessings before he gives away all he has to the Braah- 
manas and starts for the Dandaka forest.” 

The King bade Sumantra let the Prince in. 

Raama came and bowed to the King from a distance. As 
soon as he saw Raama, the King suddenly rose and rushed with 
outstretched arms to embrace him, but dropped in a swoon before 
reaching his son. 

Raama and Lakshmana tenderly lifted him up and put him on the 
couch. “My Lord”, said Raama, “we have come to seek your leave 
to go to the forest. Vaidehi and Lakshmana too are going with me in 
spite of all I could do to make them desist. Pray give us your beno- 
dictions and leave to depart.” 

Dasaratha then said: “Raama, I am bound by the boons that I 
have given to Kaikeyi. But you are not so bound. Why do you 
not brush me aside and seize the kingdom by force?” 

That had long been in the King’s mind as the best and only 
solution of this cruel problem and came out now clearly in words* 

But Raama said: “I have no desire for kingdom or power, 
father. May you reign for a thousand years more. My heart is now 
set on going to the forest and I am even now in readiness to start after 
receiving your blessing. When the fourteen years have passed I shall 
return and tender obeisance.” 

The King’s faint hope, it was now clear, must be abandoned. 
“My son! Bring glory to our line of kings. Go, but come back un¬ 
scathed. May danger flee from your path. Cling to dkarma. You 
are unshakable in resolution. Firm and unchangeable is your will. 
But do not go away today. Spend but this night here with me* 



seeta’s resolve 


75 


“Let me fill my eyes with the sight of you. You can go away at 
dawn. Like one handling a live coal deceptively covered with ash, 
I gave the promise to Kaikeyi not knowing what was in her mind. I 
am now helpless and caught in her net. And you say, ‘I shall fulfil 
my father’s promise. I shall not let dishonour blot the name of my 
father. 1 shall give up the kingdom and go to the forest.’ Where 
in the world can one find a son like unto you? I swear to you, 1 did 
not intend this great wrong.” 

Thus piteously spoke the King. It was Dasaratha’s wish to die 
without losing—even in his last moments—the respect of Raama. 

“Father, send for Bharata at once and fulfil the promise you have 
given to mother Kaikeyi. Do not be troubled by the thought that 
your are doing me a wrong, for I had no desire for the throne, and 
do not feel it a deprivation to be denied it. Untroubled by grief or 
doubt, have Bharata crowned and give him your blessings. Cast 
all grief aside. Shed no tears. Can the ocean dry up? So may you 
too not lose your balance ever, great father. 

“My sole wish is to make good the word you gave. If I got all 
the wealth of the world, but falsify your word, what joy would that 
be to me? I shall spend my time happily in the forest. Where but 
in the forests can one find beauty or joy? Father, you are my God. 
I take it that it is God that sends me to the forest. When the fourteen 
years are over, you will see me again. Do not grieve. 

“What profits it that I stay here a night longer and go tomorrow? 
Time is made up of a succession of tomorrows and one day is just 
like another. Inevitable sorrows do not become joys by postpone¬ 
ment.” 

“Well then, send for the commanders,” said the King to Su- 
mantra, “and order them to get ready the chariots, elephants, horses 
and foot soldeirs, to go with Raama to the forest. And along with 
the army send all the necessary stores for Raama to live with the Rishis 
of the forest. Let there be nothing wanting in men, money or things.” 

Poor Dasaratha imagined that he could make Raama’s exile to 
the forest something like a royal tour affording a pleasant change from 
routine, and enlivened by exchange of gracious hospitalities with the 
sylvan population. 

As he spoke Kaikeyi’s face paled with anger. She glowered^ at 
the King, and in a voice tremulous with scornful wrath she said: “A 
good and generous monarch surely! Your will give Bharata this king- 
dome after squeezing out of it all the good it holds, as one might offer 
in mockery an empty tankard to a man dying of thirst 1 What pleasure 
or glory will my son have in ruling a deserted state?” 

Dasaratha groaned in helpless chagrin and marvelled at a cruelty 



76 


RAAMAAYANA 


that could stab a man already crushed under an intolerable burden. 
Angry words rose from the mouths of those around, few* even the 
courtiers found this open heartlessness more than they could suffer 
in silence. Raama put an end to all recriminations by saying he would 
not agree to take paraphernalia incongruous with what was intended 
in forest life. 

“Honoured Lord,” he said, “what use have I, who am departing 
to the forest to live on what sylvan nature yields, for an army or the 
glittering equipage of a royal pageant? After gladly renouncing the 
throne, what use have I for its trammels? Would it not be covetous 
folly, after having parted with the elephant, to burden oneself with 
the ponderous chain? Father, I have cheerfully relinquished my claim 
to the kingdom in favour of Bharata and his mother, and with it all 
the incidents of royalty. For my foruteen years of forest life I re- 
quire nothing but bark garments such as Rishis wear and simple neces¬ 
saries of forest life such as spades and baskets.” 

Hardly had Raama spoken these words when the unabashed 
Kaikeyi hastened to produce the forest dress she had kept ready and 
gave it herself without a blush to Raama. Then and there Raama 
dressed himself in bark. And in these garments he shone like a Rishis. 
Lakshmana too changed into bark dress, while Dasaratha watched all 
this in helpless anguish. 

Then Kaikeyi brought a bark dress for Seeta too. She received 
it and stood bewildered, for she had never worn such garments before 
and did not know how to change into them. 

Approaching Raama, who stood there resplendent with divine 
effulgence, Seeta said shyly: “Pray, tell me, how does one put this thing 
on?” As Raama took up the bark dress and, wrapping it over Seeta’s 
silk, made a knot over her shoulder, the ladies-in-waiting wailed 
aloud and Dasaratha fell into a swoon. 

When he regained consciousness, he loudly reviled Kaikeyi, but 
she only smiled scornfully. She surely was not responsible for Seeta 
going to the forest. The princess sought her own pleasure by going 
to the forest with her husband and would not be dissuaded. 

Lowering his eyes as he was leaving, Raama said: “Father, I 
leave behind my mother Kausalya, blameless and tender-hearted lady, 
bereft of her son in her old age. This sudden fate is bitter to her as 
death, but she consents to live only for your sake, to share your sorrow 
and console you. She is incapable of harbouring an unkind thought 
towards any one, and she has never before felt the pang of such poignant 
parting. Be kind to her when I am no longer here and, when I return 
after my long exile in the hope of putting my head on her feet, let me 
not hear that she has died of sorrow.” 



TO THE FOREST 


77 


Thus Raama spoke, unable to bear the thought of his mother’s 
grief. As Raama went out speaking thus, Dasaratha could not 
endure the sight and covered his face with his hands. 


chapter xvm 

TO THE FOREST 

After Raama left his father’s presence with these words, the stricken 
King lay prostrated in speechless sorrow, and it was some time before 
he could muster his faculties sufficiently even to think. 

When he recovered some strength, he muttered half unconsci¬ 
ously: “Surely I must in a previous birth have inflicted hideous 
suffering to loving hearts. I must have torn calves from their mothers, 
children from their parents, husbands from their wives. How else 
could I suffer thus? And death does not come when we want it. And 
I have to endure the torture of always having before my mind’s eye 
my godlike son deprived of his birth-right and forced into the bark- 
garments of hermit. O life, how bitterly you cling to those who would 
be rid of you! Raama has gone into exile and yet I do not die! 
Raama.Raama.Have you gone?.” 

A little later, his mind clearer, the King said: “Sumantra, get 
ready the chariot and take my sons and Jaanaki to the frontier of the 
kingdom.” 

Lakshmana touched the feet of his mother Sumitra and uttered 
the single word “Mother.” She embraced him, kissed his head 
and said: “Your devotion to your brother has filled your mother’s 
heart with pride and joy. It is your duty, child, to guard and serve 
Raama. Always stand in vigilant watch by Raama’s side in the forest. 
Your elder brother is to you both preceptor and king. This is the 
dharma of our race. 

“Go with my blessing, Lakshmana. In the forest, regard Raama 
as your father and look upon Jaanaki as myself and the forest will be 
to you as Ayodhya. Go cheerfully, my dear son, —and God bless 
you” 

In the Raamaayana , Sumitra is a woman of few words and mature 
wisdom and great tact and infinite courage, full of faith, in whom 
’hope shines like a flame when it has gone out in all others.’ The tradi¬ 
tion is that Sumitra knew Raama’s divinity and the purpose of his 
incarnation and that this enabled her not only to comfort Kausalya 
but to see a holy ministration in Lakshmana’s sharing Raama’s 
exile. 






78 


RAAMAAYANA 


Sumantra said: “Ascend the chariot, O Prince. God bless you. 
Tell me where I am to drive, for the fourteen-year period has begun, 
my Prince.” 

Seeta got up the chariot cheerfully. Kausalya had made up for 
her a packet of personal requirements. The shields, bows and arrows 
and other weapons of the two brothers together with pickaxes and 
baskets were placed in the chariot. Pickaxes and baskets are essential 
in the forest. Raama and Lakshmana ascended the chariot. Su¬ 
mantra drove it forward. 

Let us pause a while at this stage when Raama’s forest life begins, 
and pray that we may be purified of our sins. Truth, courage and 
love is the gospel of the Raamaayana to us. To give it to us was Raa¬ 
ma born. We shall gain these gifts if we meditate on the Princes and 
Jaanaki in the bark habiliments as they left the city. 

The crowds in the street cried to the charioteer: “Go slow, go 
slow. Let us have a look at Raama’s face.” 

“Alas, Alas, who could send such children to the forest? How 
could their mothers endure this sorrow and survive? Look at Vaidehi’s 
face. She is indeed blessed. And Lakshmana is happy to have such 
a brother to whom he can give devoted service. He is indeed a hero 
and a knower of dharma .” So the people of the city talked among 
themselves as they followed the chariot. And their grief swelled like 
a flood. 

Raama was saying to the good charioteer, “Faster, faster.” The 
people were saying, “Slow, slow.” And the crowd became bigger 
and bigger. Sumantra managed somehow to take the chariot out of 
the press of the mourning town where in addition to the loud sorrow 
of the crowded streets, the houses were full of mourning women and 
children. 

The King stepped out of Kaikeyi’s apartment and looked at the 
departing chariot. A long time he stood there watching the cloud of 
dust as though he saw in it the beloved form of Raama. When even 
this went out of sight, he fell down moaning. Kausalya and Kai- 
keyi sat on either side. 

“Do not touch me,” said Dasaratha to Kaikeyi. *1 hate the 
sight of you, sinful woman! Everything is at an end between you and 
me. I renounce you here and now.” 

“If Bharata agrees to your arrangements and accepts the king¬ 
dom,” he said again, “he need not perform my obsequies, and even 
if he did, my departed spirit would reject his offering of waters.” 

“How can Raama live in the forest? Will he sleep on the bare 
ground with a stone or a log for a pillow? Will he eat fruits and 
berries?” 



TO THE FOREST 


79 


Thus the king went on lamenting helplessly. 

Sometimes he would turn to Kaikeyi and ssy, “May you be happy 
in your success! Long may you live a happy widow.” 

Heart-broken and empty like one returning home from the cre¬ 
mation ground, he entered Kaikeyi’s apartment by force of habit; 
tiem suddenly he said, “Not here. Take me to the dwelling of Kau- 
salya.” 

And so they did, and there he lay waiting for his end. 

At midnight, he said, “Kausalya, are you there? Touch me with 
your hand. My sight is gone with Raama.” 

Poor Kausalya did her best to comfort the King, but what com¬ 
fort was there in her wounded heart to give? For as the slow sorrow- 
laden hours crawled from watch to watch, the cold night seemed 
to her a devouring flame, and the gentle moon fierce as the noonday 
sun. 

To her thus sorrowing, Sumitra said: “Sister, you have heard 
the Shaastras and know dharma . Why should you grieve like this? 
It is your office to put courage in others, you should not lose heart 
yourself. Raama has gone to the forest for guarding the King’s 
honour. You are ineed blessed among women, for you are the 
mother of a hero who has scorned a kingdom and perferred to up¬ 
hold his father’s honour. Why should you grieve for a son who 
fulfils a difficult duty to perfection? We should not feel sorry for one 
who walks in the path of his ancestors and wins undying fame. I 
am proud that Lakshmana has accompanied Raama. Jaanaki, 
though knowing well the hardships she has to face, has also gone with 
her husband. Raama’s glory will shine like an undying lamp. This 
is no occasion for grief. His purity, his virtue shall be a shield and 
armour to him. 

“ He is so great and holy that the sun’s rays falling on him will 
not bum him and the wind that blows will caress him with its coolness. 
His pure frame, as he sleeps at night, will be embraced and protected 
by the moonbeams as an infant is by its loving mother. Shed all 
anxiety over your heroic son. No foe can encounter him and escape 
with life. Our Raama is endowed with all auspicious qualities. 
Your hero-son will surely return to Ayodhya and ascend the throne. 
The Lord of the world, and no other, is Raama. 

“ Seeta is with him, and Seeta is no other than the Goddess 
Lakshmi. Raama will return and ascending the throne will fill with 
delight the kingdom which now laments his exile. Your saw the 
grief of the citizens as they watched his departure. My heroic son, 
the devoted Lakshmana, armed with bow and sword, has gone with 
him to guard his person. No harm, no danger can approach Raama. 



80 


RAAMAAYANA 


You will see with your own eyes Raama returning after fulfilment 
of his vow. 

“ Believe me, Raama will return, beautiful like the full moon, 
and touch your feet with joy and devotion. You will then shed tears 
not of grief but ofjoy. Dear, dear Kausalya, give up your grief, 
You will see the three of them returning. You should console and 
encourage the other women in the palace and not stand broken¬ 
hearted yourself. Who else in this world stands firm by dharma like 
Raama? Is this a cause for grief? No, be proud of your son, 
Kausalya !” 

Listening to Sumitra’s words, Kausalya was somewhat conso/ed. 

The people of the city followed Raama’s chariot in a huge crowd. 
They tried to stop the chariot, shouting, “ Do not go to the forest. 
Return to the city.” 

“ I am going to the forest to uphold my father’s word,” Raama 
said. ” There is no theme for sorrow here and you should not seek 
to hinder me.” 

But the people would not listen to him, and went in crowds 
after him shouting wildly : “ Do not go to the forest, do not go 

to the forest !” Raama stopped the chariot and addressed them 
with his eyes full of love for them : “ Citizens of Ayodhya, I know 

the love you bear for me. Your will show it best by transferring it 
on my behalf, and at my behest, to my beloved brother Bharata. 
Nothing else will please me more. Bharata is good and noble, has 
all royal qualities and is fully worthy of love. So conduct yourselves 
as to please him. Young in years, he is old in wisdom and his heart 
is at once heroic and tender. He has the strength to protect you. 
He is your king, and you owe him loyalty and affection. 

“ I am going to the forest to fulfil my father’s word and the King 
has appointed Bharata as Yuvarraaja. He is in every way fitted for 
that position. You and I alike should obey the King’s commands. 
You should go back and try to mitigate the sorrow of my father at 
parting from me.” 

Thus Raama spoke to them in kindly tones. But they loved 
him all the more because of this and would not be consoled. Some 
Braahmanas, old in years and excellent in virtue, looking at the 
chariot wept and cried : “ Why, O horses, do you carry our Raama 
into the forest? We have heard it said that horses are sharp of 
hearing. Listen to us then and bring back our Raama.” 

Hearing these words of yearning from old Braahmanas, Raama 
stopped the chariot. The three descended from it and went forward 
king. 

The common people, leading citizens and wise elders, men of 



TO THE FOREST 


81 


penance—why, even the birds on wings—tried to prevent Raama 
from going to the forest. The river Tamasa, says the poet, seemed 
to conspire with them, for now it flowed across his path. The chariot 
stopped on the river bank. Sumantra unyoked and watered the 
horses and let them loose to graze. 

Raama said : “ Lakshmana, this is the first night of our forest 

life. Let us spend it on the bank of this holy river. Life in the 
forest holds no hardship, as you and I know. Look, the birds, the 
animals and even the trees seem to sympathise with us. The only 
pain is when we think of the grief of our parents in Ayodhya, though 
1 feel re-assured as I think of Bharata’s nobility and goodness. He 
will assuredly tend our parents with true affection. Sumantra, go 
look after the horses.” 

Then, Raama offered the evening prayers by the river and said : 
“ Let us fast on this first night of our forest life, Lakshmana. Your 
presence by my side rids me of all care.” 

Lakshmana spread some grass on the ground for Raama and 
Seeta to sleep on but he himself spent the night in vigil talking with 
Sumantra. 

Long before dawn Raama rose from sleep and told Sumantra : 
4 ‘ The citizens who have followed us, fatigued by their long journey 
are fast asleep. I am deeply moved by their affection; but 1 cannot 
permit their love to force me to go back. Let us, therefore, move 
on even now, while they are yet asleep.” 

The horses were harnessed and tne chariot slowly crossed the 
river. Standing on the southern bank. Raama told Sumantra : “ If 

you take the chariot to the other shore, where the people are asleep, 
and drive it for a little distance towards Ayodhya and then bring it 
back to this side, we can proceed on our journey before they wake up. 
They will see the track of the chariot going towards the city, and 
thinking that we have returned home, may themselves go back. Un¬ 
less you do this the crowd will go on following us.” 

Sumantra did this and when the chariot returned, the three got 
into it again and proceeded southwards. 



CHAPTER XIX 


ALONE BY THEMSELVES 

The citizens who had slept on the bank of the Tamasa woke up in 
the morning and looked round. They were surprised to see that 
Raama and the chariot had disappeared. They followed the track 
of the chariot-wheels but were disappointed to find that it was lost 
in the main road to the capital. 

They returned home to their own houses and sought satisfaction 
in reviling Kaikeyi. Without Raama, the city was bereft of beauty 
and wrapt in gloom. 

Sumantra and the princes had crossed the Tamasa long before 
dawn and travelled far into the forest. Crossing several streams, 
they approached the southern boundary of the Kosala country. As 
they journeyed on, Raama said to Sumantra : “ I wonder when 

I shall hunt again in the forest of Sarayu ? Is hunting good for 
princes ? Perhaps, it is—in moderation.” 

Thus conversing on many matters, they went forward. When 
they reached the southern boundary of the kingdom, Raama stopped 
the chariot and facing north towards Ayodhya, bent his head in a 
prayer, saying : ” O, jewel among cities ! O ancient capital of the 

Ikshvaakus ! Shall 1, finishing my penance in the forest, live to sec 
my father and mother and you ? Grant me that supreme joy.” 

The chariot reached the bank of the Ganga. They proceeded 
along the bank, admiring the beauty of the river. Finding a spot 
of surpassing charm, Raama said : “ We shall spend the night 

here.” 

Untying the horses, they sat under a tree. Guha, the chief of 
the region having learnt already from his men that Raama would be 
coming there, came forward with *his retinue to greet Raapia and 
Lakshmana. 

He had unbounded love for the Royal family and for Raama. 
Being the chieftain of the tribes who dwelt on the banks of Ganga, 
he was a man of great prestige and power. Raama and Lakshmana 
rose to greet Guha, even while the latter was still at some distance 
from them. Guha welcomed them with a hearty embrace, saying : 
" Regard this land as your own. This place is as much yours as is 
Ayodhya. Who can hope to have a guest like you ? It is indeed 
my good fortune.” 

Guha had prepared a lavish entertainment. He said : “ Feel 
perfectly at home and happy in my kingdom. You may spend all 
the fourteen years with us here. You will not lack anything, I assure 



ALONE BY THEMSELVES 83 

you. Looking after you will be a pleasure and privilege to me. Be 
gracious enough to accept my hospitality.” 

Warmly embracing Guha again, Raama said : “ Brother, I 
know how deep is your love for me. Your wish is itself as good as 
hospitality rendered. I am bound by my vows and must refuse 
anything more. I have come to dwell in the forest and not to enjoy 
life as a chieftain’s guest. These horses are my dear father’s favou¬ 
rites. Pray feed them well. We shall be content with simple food 
and rest for the night.” 

They lay under the tree for the night. Guha and Lakshmana 
kept awake, conversing with Sumantra. 

Said Guha to Lakshmana : “ Brother, do go and rest. There 

is a bed made ready for you. My men will keep careful watch. 
None dare do anything in the forest unknown to me. Have no 
anxiety regarding Raama. Do sleep.” 

Lakshmana replied : “ How can I find sleep, Guha ? Here, 

lying on the bare ground, is Seeta, daughter of the great Janaka and 
daughter-in-law of the great Dasaratha. The great Purushottama 
himself who could subdue the three worlds lies streatched on the 
grass. How can I sleep who sees this ? 

“ I wonder how Ayodhya is bearing it. The queens’ apartments 
must be loud with wailing. I even doubt if at this moment Kausalya 
and my mother are alive. My father indeed found strength somehow 
to say to Raama, 4 Go to the forest,* but I doubt if he has strength 
enough left to survive Raama’s actual departure. And if he has 
passed away, our mothers too will have given up their lives. And 
here we are, deprived even of the privilege of doing the last offices 
to the dead. 

“ In any case it is hardly possible that our father and mothers 
will be alive to greet us, when we return to Ayodhya after our term 
in the forest.” 

Thus spoke Lakshmana in sorrow. Guha was in tears. The 
night was spent in such sad conversation. 

Early next morning, Raama told Lakshmana : “ We must now 
cross the river. Ask Guha to make ready a boat big enough for 
crossing this broad river.” Guha ordered his men to get this done 
and informed Raama. 

Sumantra bowed low and stood before Raama seeking his further 
commands. 

Raama understood Sumantra’s unuttered grief and, laying his 
hand on Sumantra’s shoulders, said : “ Sumantra, return to Ayodhya 
with all speed and be at the side of the King. Your duty is now to 
look after him.” 



84 


RAAMAAYANA 


“ O Raama,” exclaimed Sumantra, “ rectitude, learning and 
culture seem to be of no value. You and your brother and Vaidehi 
are going to live in the forest. What is going to be our lot ? How are 
we going to fare under Kaikeyi’s rule ?” He now wept like a child. 

Wiping the tears from Sumantra’s eyes, Raama said : “ Our 
family has known no nobler friend than you. It will be your task 
to console my father. His heart is riven by grief. Whatever his 
commands, carry them out dutifully. Do not ask yourself whether 
he wants a thing for himself or with a view to pleasing Kaikeyi. Avoid 
giving him any pain of mind. Have no anxiety about us. 

44 You should say this on my behalf to my aged father who is 
stricken with a grief he never knew before. Clasp his feet as you 
have seen me do, and assure him from me that none of us—not I nor 
Lakshmana, nor Seeta—feel injured or sorry at having been sent 
away from Ayodhya. We look forward to fourteen years of forest 
life which will speed on happy wings, and then surely we shall return 
to his feet for blessings. Give our love to my mother Kausalya, and 
tell her that protected by her blessings we are well and give a like 
message to my stepmothers, specially to Kaikeyi, lest she should 
think we have parted in anger. Tell the Mahaaraaja that it is my 
earnest prayer tnat he should hasten with the installation of Bharata, 
so that he may be a comfort to him in our absence.” 

But Sumantra, unable to restrain his grief, burst out : 44 How 

am I to return and with what words can I give comfort ?” And 
when he looked at the empty chariot, he wept and said : 44 How 
shall I drive this chariot that stands desolate without you ?” 

Once again Raama spoke words of comfort and courage to Suman¬ 
tra and urged on him the duty of patience, and sent him home. 

44 Guha,” said Raamaf 44 1 could indeed spend fourteen years 
in your kingdom as you desire. But would that be fulfilling my 
vow ? I have left Ayodhya to fulfil my father’s pledge. I must 
therefore lead the life of a tapasvi. I must not touch dishes daintily 
cooked and served. We have to live only on fruits, roots and per¬ 
missible kinds of meat such as we offer in the sacrificial fire.” 

Comforting Guha thus, the brothers got their locks matted with 
the milk of the banyan. They helped Seeta into the boat and then 
got into it themselves. Guha bade the boatmen to row it across. 

The boatmen took them quickly across the river. At midstream 
Seeta offered a prayer to the goddess of the river : 44 Devi, help us 
fulfil our vow and return safe to our homeland.” 

They talked as they went on. They reached the farther bank 
of Ganga. And there, for the first time, the three stood alone, un¬ 
attended by friends l 



ALONE BY THEMSELVES 


iS 

“ Lakshmana, you are my sole armed guard now,” said Raama. 
“You will go first. Seeta will follow. And I shall walk behind 
you both. We must save Seeta as far as possible from the hardships- 
of forest life. Hereafter there will be none to keep us company and 
no fun or amusement.” 

Raama’s thoughts went to his mother Kausalya. 

“ Lakshmana,” he said, “ should you not go back to Ayodhya 
and look after mother Kausalya and Sumitra Devi ? I shall manage 
my forest stay somehow.” 

Lakshmana replied : “ Forgive me, brother ; I am not going 
back to Ayodhya.” Raama indeed expected no other answer. 

Thus now and again we shall see the human element come up 
and the divine Prince grieve and talk as common people do. This is 
the fascination of the Raamaayana. If Almighty God remains 
almighty and does everything Himself, then where is room or need 
for an avataar and how could the dharma of common men be 
established ? 

This is the difference between the earlier avataars and the later. 
In the Raama -avataar, the course of human conduct and the dharma 
governing it come linked together. This has been made explicit by 
Vaalmeeki: 

On the occasion of Seeta’s ordeal by fire at the end of the battle,. 
Raama says to Brahma who appeared then among others and depre¬ 
cated the idea of putting Seeta to proof:— 

“ I regard myself only as Raama, son of Dasaratha, an ordinary 
human being. Who I am in reality, where I belong, why I took 
birth, are matters on which you must enlighten me, and I do not 
know.” 

While Raama was plunged in thinking of the mothers left behind,. 
Lakshmana ministered to him with loving words of courage and! 
hope. 

They spent that night under a banyan tree and left early next 
morning for Bharadwaaja’s aashrama which they reached at sunset. 

Partaking of the hospitality of the sage, they besought him to 
tell where they could spend the years quietly in the forest and on his. 
advice and with his blessings left for Chitrakoota. 



CHAPTER XX 


CHITRAKOOTA 

Raama spent the night in Bharadwaaja’s aashrama . Getting up 
in the morning, they paid their respects to the Maharishi and, taking 
leave of mm, set out for the Chitrakoota hill. The muni treated 
them affectionately as if they were his own children and sent them 
forth with his blessings after explaining to them the way they should 
take through the forest. 

The three followed his topographical instructions closely and 
in due course came upon the river Kaalindi. They constructed a raft 
with logs and bamboos and creepers of the forest and on it Lakshmana 
made a seat for Seeta with little twigs and leaves on which she sat. 
The passage of the river was accomplished in safety. 

In midstream Seeta offered salutations to the river goddess and 
prayed that Raama might fulfil his vow and the three be enabled 
safely to return home. 

After crossing a few more streams, they came to a big banyan 
tree which had been described by Bharadwaaja. And under this 
tree Seeta again offered prayers saying : “ Grant, O holy tree, that 
my husband may complete his vow and that I may see again the 
<jueens Kausalya and Sumitra.” 

Raama asked Lakshmana to walk in front with Seeta behind 
him while he himself followed in rear. “ Whatever flower or fruit 
she asks for on the way,” he said, “ get it for her and keep her spirits 
up.” 

As Seeta went she showed an eager curiosity, asking about forest 
trees and creepers and was lost in admiration at the manysided beauty 
of forest life. 

They greatly enjoyed the journey and rested for the night on 
the bank of a river. 

Here and in other places, Vaalmeeki describes how Raama and 
Lakshmana secured food by hunting. He makes it quite plain that 
they had to subsist largely on meat. Some good men are troubled 
by this. But meat was not prohibited for Kshatriyas. Indeed, it 
has always been the rule in India to permit any food legitimately 
obtained and consecrated as a sacrifice. Raama was a Kshatriya 
and he lived in the forest in the Kshatriya way, though abstemiously. 

The following morning Raama woke up Lakshmana and said : 
4 ‘ Listen, the birds are singing to the morning sun. It is time for us 
to start.” 

The popular story that Lakshmana spent the whole period of 



CHITRAKOOTA 


87 


forest life without food or sleep is not found in Vaalmeeki. Some¬ 
times, even, through fatigue Lakshmana did not get up quite early 
in the morning and Raarria had to rouse him from slumber ! 

They performed their ablutions and worship and resumed their 
journey in the path indicated by Bharadwaaja. The season was- 
summer and the trees and plants were ablaze with multicoloured 
flowers. The branches bowed under the weight of fruits and blos¬ 
soms. 

Raama pointed out the beauty of the forest to Seeta from time 
to time, saying as they walked : “ How beautiful is the forest unspoilt 
by human interference ! Look at the beehives hanging there ! Look 
at the ground entirely covered with fallen flowers ! Listen to the 
birds ! How beautifully they sing to one another and live in joy T 
Life would indeed be pleasant if we could always enjoy such sights- 
and sounds.” 

Then they saw at a distance the Chitrakoota hill. They were 
glad and began to walk briskly towards it. 44 How beautiful this 
region is !” exlaimed Raama. “ The forest here has fine edible 
roots and fruits. The water is clear and sweet. Rishis dwell in 
aashramas in this forest and we may most certainly live happily here 
in their holy company.” 

They proceeded to put up an aashrama there for themseles. 
Lakshmana was a clever workman. He soon constructed a strong 
hut, which was weather-proof and made it comfortable and con¬ 
venient. Single-handed, he completed the mud hut with windows and 
doors all made of bamboos and jungle material. 

Kamban and Vaalmeeki vie with each other in their accounts, 
of this episode. Kamban says that when Lakshmana had com¬ 
pleted the structure, Raama embraced him weeping and asked him : 
44 When and how did you learn all this ?” One can imagine the scene. 

Raama, his eyes filled with tears of joy, said, according to* 
Kamban : 44 The flower-soft feet of the Princess of Mithila have 
traversed the hard forest floor. If her feet have done a wonder, 
why, Lakshmana, your hands too have wrought a miracle of house¬ 
building ! I have seen today the gain that is in misfortune.” 

Here, beside the lovely Chitrakoota hill, on the bank of the 
river Maalyavati, in that ^cottage the three young people lived, free 
from care, performing their daily devotional routine. They forgot 
that they were in exile and spent the time happily, like Indra in Heaven, 
surrounded by the gods. 

The happy life in Chitrakoota is a wonderful background to* 
set off the later sufferings and sorrows of the three. 



CHAPTER XXI 


A MOTHER’S GRIEF 

ISumantra and Guha stood watching the three figures as long as they 
*couid. When they disappeared from sight, they were plunged in 
sorrow and went back to Guha’s town. After a while Sumantra 
^returned to Ayodhya. 

As the charioteer approached the city,he found it desolate and 
devoid of the usual cheerful bustle of urban life. As soon as he 
crossed the fortress-gate and entered the city, his chariot was 
•surrounded by a crowd eagerly asking : “ Where did you leave 
Raama? How was he when you left him ?” 

44 Dear people of Ayodhya,” said Sumantra, 44 Raama and 
Lakshmana have crossed the Ganga. Ordering me to return home, 
they entered the forest on foot.” 

A great cry of grief rose from the multitude and many cursed 
.themselves and attributed the catastrophe to their own sins. On 
iboth sides of the streets, women stood as the chariot passed and 
-cried : 44 Look at the car which departed with the princes and Seeta 
and has come back empty.” 

Sumantra drove forward covering his face with the end of his 
dipper garment, ashamed of himself. He stopped the chariot in 
front of Dasaratha’s palace and alighted. 

There in front of the palace a great crowd had gathered. Women 
were saying, 44 How is Sumantra going to meet Kausalya and tell her 
that he left her son in the forest ? How will she survive the report ?” 

With increasing sorrow and confusion, Sumantra entered the 
Oueen’s apartment. There he saw the King more dead than alive. 
In low tones, he spoke Raama’s message to the King who heard it in 
lieart-broken silence. 

Then Kausalya, unable to control her wrath, addressed the 
Xing : 44 Here stands your minister who has returned from the forest 
after leaving my child to fulfil your command. Why are you silent ? 
It was easy and pleasant to give boons to Kaikeyi. Why are you 
ashamed of it now ? Did you not know that this would be the result 
of what you did ? You have honoured your word. You may be 
happy over that. But who can share my sorrow with me ? I have 
to tear it all. My grief cannot be reduced by your pain. 

44 No convention binds you to feel or appear to be grieved for 
'what you have deliberately done. Why are you silent ? You need 
not refrain from giving expression to sorrow for fear of offending 
Kaikeyi, for she is not here. Surely you should enquire of Sumantra 



A mother’s grief 


89* 


about Raama. Have you no humanity ? Why do you try to suppress 
even natural feelings ?” 

Her grief and love for Raama blinded her to the state of her 
husband’s body and mind. Instead of lightening, she aggravated’ 
his suffering. 

Dasaratha opened his eyes and Sumantra reported duly Raama’s 
message in his own words. 

Sumantra tried his best to console Kausalya. But she went on 
repeating: “ Take me and leave me where Raama is. Young 
Seeta is there with him facing the hardships of the forest. I cannot 
bear this agony. Let me go to Dandaka and be with Seeta.” 

Sumantra answered : “ Queen, be brave. Banish this grief. 
Raama spends his time even more happily in the forest than he did 
in Ayodhya. He feels no sorrow. Lakshmana finds joy in the- 
supreme job of dutiful service to the brother he loves. He is very 
happy. As for Seeta, there in the forest, as here in the palace, she 
lives for Raama with every breath and knows neither fear nor sorrow. 
She spends her time as though she were a sylvan goddess and is as 
happy there as she was here playing in the groves and gardens of 
Ayodhya. The beauty of her face is still like the rising moon’s. Like 
a forest fawn she lives there with care-free grace, spending the golden 
hours with Raama by her side. Every sight and sound is a 
new source of joy to her and the theme of talk with Raama and 
Lakshmana. 

“ Walking barefoot, her feet are red like the lotus, and need no 
painting with henna. She walks the forest as if she were dancing ; 
she only lacks the tinkling anklets to make it complete. All that I say 
is true. There is no need for you to grieve. 

“ The three of them are fulfilling their sacred duty and offering 
an object lesson to the world. They are making the King’s word 
good. Their life will be remembered and praised for ever. Why, 
then, should we grieve for them ?” 

With such talk, Kausalya would be consoled for a while. But 
soon she would break down again and cry : “ Alas, alas, Raama, 
my child.” Her grief seemed redoubled when she saw Sumantra 
come back, leaving Raama in the forest. 



CHAPTER XXII 


IDLE SPORT AND TERRIBLE RESULT 

Dasaratha had been driven ruthlessly by circumstances to an action 
Avhich not only broke his heart but made him hate himself and de¬ 
prived him even of self-pity. The only way out of the dilemma of 
either breaking his plighted word or doing a great wrong to Raama 
•would have been for the latter to disobey him and insist on his rights ; 
tout Raama placed his duty to his father high above all other things, 
and Raama was all the world to Seeta and Lakshmana. So they 
toad all gone together. 

To Dasaratha, agonising on his bed of pain in desolation and 
remorse, Kausalya spoke reproachful words. 

The stinging words in which Kausalya’s sorrow found expression 
caused excruciating pain to Dasaratha, but she seemed to find some 
relief in giving vent to her feelings in this way : 

“ Proud of having kept your word and happy in young Kaikeyi’s 
approval and gratification, have you any thought for others ? You 
toave been my world and my god, my joy in this world and my hope 
for the next and you have forsaken me. My son, the light of my life, 
toas been wrenched away from me and banished. I live here alone, 
old, helpless woman, without the love of my lord or the sight of my 
only son. Was ever a woman left more desolate ? But you—are 
you not delighted with what you have done ? 

“ It is enough for you that Kaikeyi and Bharata are happy. 
You need not Entertain any fear that Raama will mar that happiness, 
even if he returned from the forest after fourteen years. He will 
not touch the kingdom once ruled by Bharata. The tiger does not 
touch the leavings of another animal’s kill. Like a fish, eating its 
offspring, you have killed your own child.” 

Touched to the quick, the King even in the intensity of his anguish 
turned to his wife with a humble prayer for forgiveness with clasped 
hands. 

44 Have pity on me, Kausalya,” he moaned. 44 You have been 
hind and forgiving even to strangers. Do have some compassion 
on your husband who has always loved and honoured you and whose 
heart is broken by a sorrow which knows no remedy I” 

These piteous words and the sight of her husband in supplication 
and the memory of happier hours pierced the noble queen to the heart 
and she fell at his feet imploring forgiveness for unbecoming words 
forced out of her by grief. 

As the leaden hours crept slowly on, Dasaratha remembered 



IDLE SPORT AND TERRIBLE RESULT 


91 


something that had happened long ago and it aggravated the anguish 
of his heart. The King turned to Kausalya and said : 

“ Are you still here, my dear ? The fruit of one’s action can 
never be escaped. I now endure the result of a great sin that I com¬ 
mitted in the days that are gone. Men in their ignorance sometimes 
do great evils for the sake of some slight momentary pleasure. Then 
when the time comes the price has to be paid. 

“ When I was young, I had the skill to use my bow against unseen 
targets aiming by sound only. For the pleasure of exercising this 
skill, I once killed an innocent man and committed a great sin. Listen, 

I shall relate to you that sad adventure. 

44 It was before you came to me. One night I went out in my 
chariot to hunt on the banks of the Sarayu. It had been raining 
heavily and, from the mountain sides, the steams were running dyed 
with the rich colours of minerals and fresh soil. The birds were 
slient. The forest seemed asleep. 

44 I could take the aim by the ear and shoot, without seeing, 
a tiger or bear or other wild beast that might come to slake its thirst 
in the stream. I wanted to test this skill of mine. It was dense 
darkness. I waited for some wild animal to come. 

“ Then I heard a gurgling sound, as of an elephant drinking* 
At once I aimed an arrow in the direction whence the sound came. 
Like a venomous serpent, swish went my dart and-hit the object. 
But I was shocked to hear a human voice exclaim : 4 Alas ! I am 

dead !’ 

“ I heard the man cry again piteously, 4 Who can be my enemy ? 
Never have I done any harm to anyone. Who then could want to 
kill me thus as I was filling my pitcher with water ? What could he 
gain by this ? Why should anyone bear hate against one living his 
innocent hermit life in the forest ? What is to happen to my old 
blind parents now, with none to look after them ? O misery ! ’ 

44 Horror-struck, I stood trembling in every limb. My bow and 
arrow slipped from my hands. I approached the place from where 
the voice came and I found a young ascetic lying on the ground with 
dishevelled hair, covered all over with blood and earth. Beside him 
lay an upturned pitcher. The look of his eyes was as fire. When he 
saw me, he cried, 4 O, Sinner that has killed me ! Why did you aim 
your arrow at me that was taking water from the stream ? My old 
blind parents are thirsty and are waiting for me in the aashrama, think¬ 
ing that I would return with my pitcher filled. Why did you kill me T 
O God, my penances and my devotions have all gone to naught. My 
parents do not know that I lie here stricken and helpless. They will' 
go on waiting for me and even if they knew it, what could they do,. 



*92 


RA AM A A Y ANA 


blind and helpless ? Who are you ? What ! Are you not the King 
of Kosala ? And so, you, the King, who should by right protect me, 
have slain me. Very well, O King, go yourself and tell them what you 
have done. Fall at their feet and beg for forgiveness. Else, their 
anger will reduce you to ashes. Go straight to the aashrama. Take 
that path there. Go at once and save yourself. But this arrow is a 
torture. Pull it out~and relieve me of the pain before you go.’ 

“ I knew that if I pulled out the arrow from his body, his pain 
would end indeed, but so would his life in a gush of blood. My 
hand refused to do the deed. For a while I stood, not knowing what 
to do. 

“ Then, the young ascetic said : 4 Do not hesitate. Do end my 

pain. My mind is now clear and I have calmed myself. Boldly 
pull out the arrow and release my life.’ 

44 Gently I pulled the arrow out. The young ascetic turned 
on the ground, heaved a sigh and, with his eyes fixed on me, breathed 
his last. 

44 It is this crime of mine that is now pursuing me. The agony 
of those blind parents who were deprived by me of their son has 
come now for me to endure.” 


chapter xxra 

LAST MOMENTS 

Dasaratha continued : 44 Listen, I shall tell you what followed. 

44 Having committed a sin and seeing the young ascetic die, I 
utood wondering what to do next. Finally I decided that it was my 
duty and my interest to do what he advised me. I cleaned the pitcher, 
and filling it with fresh water, took it and went along the foot-path 
he had pointed out. 

44 1 reached his cottage and there I saw the old couple waiting 
for the return of their son. They sat there like two birds with broken 
wings shrivelled in body and unable to move. Both were blind. 

“ They were speaking to each other about the long delay of 
their son in fetching water from the stream. I was filled with terror 
as I slowly approached them. 

44 The old man, hearing my footsteps, mumbled : ‘Why this 
long delay, my son? Quickly give me some water to drink. 
Your mother too is athirst. Were you making your pleasure in the 
stream ? Was this the cause of your delay, son ? Why are you 
silent ? Even if your mother or I nave offended you in any manner. 



LAST MOMENTS 


93 


you should not take it to heart. You are a perfect son and our only 
prop. We have lost our eye-sight and you serve as our eyes. Indeed, 
you are more than our life to us. Why are you still silent ? Are 
you still angry V 

“ I trembled in fear when I heard the toothless old man talking 
thus. Gathering courage I began : ‘ O, holy one, I am Dasaratha 

by name, a kshatriya, bound to obey and serve you, though not your 
son. Driven by my former karma, I have committed a terrible sin 
and stand in abject humility before you. I went to the river bank for 
sport, hoping to shoot wild beasts. I thought I heard in the darkness 
an elephant drinking water, and I aimed my arrow as I am a marksman 
that can aim by sound as well as by sight, and it was my misfortune 
and his fate that my arrow struck your son as he was filling his pitcher, 
with the gurgling I had mistaken for that of an elephant drinking. 
Thus, without intending it, I fatally .wounded your beloved son. 
When I went to the spot and saw him rolling in blood with my arrow 
stuck in his breast, I cursed myself. I was filled with horror and 
stood not knowing what to do. At his request I pulled the arrow out 
to release him from the mortal pain. He is dead. I have told you 
the horrible sin I have committed. I throw myself at your mercy. 
I await your judgment.’ 

“ The miserable couple were struck dumb by my dreadful tale 
about their son. Tears poured from their sightless eyes and the old 
man said : ‘ King, your sin is indeed great. But it was done in 
ignorance. And you have come yourself to tell me your crime. So 
you shall live. Now take us both to the spot. Let us touch our 
beloved son with our hands and send him into Yama’s keeping.’ 

“ I carried them to the river bank where their son lay dead. 
They felt his body all over, cried and blessed his soul and performed 
the cremation. 

“ Then before ascending the funeral pyre and giving themselves 
up to the fire, they turned to me and said : ‘ This great grief you 
have brought about for us, you too, will endure in good time. You 
will die of grief parted from your son.’ 

“ Saying this, they burnt themselves and their souls joined the 
gods. My sin has pursued me and I am now in its grip. 

“ My old crime is killing me now. As food prohibited by the 
doctors foolishly consumed by a sick man kills him, what that old 
father uttered in unbearable grief has now come true. I have sent 
my innocent son to the forest and unable to bear the grief, I now 
enter Yama’s abode. 

“How else could these unnatural events occur? How else 
could l be thus deceived and betrayed ? Even if I ordered Raama 



94 


RAAMAAYANA 


to go to forest, why should he obey my unjust command ? Why 
should he insist on being exiled ? It is the curse of that old blind 
couple, nothing else. 

“ Kausalya, I do not see you. My sight is gone. Death is fast 
approaching. Come nearer and let me feel you. All is over. The 
messengers of Yama are calling me. Will Raama come ? Shall I 
see him before I die ? Oh, I am dying. The oil is all consumed and 
my light is going out ! Ah Kausalya ! Oh Sumitra !” 

His life slowly ebbed away and that night at some time unobserved 
by any, the King breathed his last. 

As described by Vaalmeeki in the early pages of the epic, Dasara- 
tha was one who had mastered all the Vedas and Shaastras , was a far¬ 
sighted person, the hero of many battles, the performer of many 
sacrifices, follower of dhartna ,a far-famed king with many friends and 
no foes, one who had conquered his senses. His power was like 
Indra’s. His wealth was like Kubera’s. In statesmanship, he was 
like Manu. Fate had ordered that such a one should exile his beloved 
son and die of a broken heart, with none by him in his last moments 
but two faithful women stricken by himself with a common sorrow. 

Since the King had so often fainted and recovered, his death 
was not immediately noticed by Kausalya or Sumitra. They were 
weary, too, with grief and watching, and fell into a sleep of fatigue in a 
corner of the apartment. At dawn, the musicians and singers, whose 
duty it was to rouse the King from slumber, came to his bed chamber 
and played on instruments and sang the usual hymns. 

But they saw no sign of the King waking. The royal servants 
who attended to the King’s morning needs waited long and wondered 
why he slept till so late. Then they made bold to enter the apartment 
and saw him lying dead. 

Soon the news spread and filled the palace with grief. The widows 
of the great Dasaratha cried like orphaned children, embracing one 
another in unavailing lamentation. 


CHAPTER XXIV 

BHARATA ARRIVES 

Kausalya clung to the King’s body and cried : “ I shall go with 
the King to Yama’s abode. How can I live without my son and 
without my husband ? M 

The elders and officers of the palace managed to separate her 
from the dead King and take her away. Then they discussed about 



BHARATA ARRIVES 


95 


the funeral rites. They could not be performed immediately, for 
Raama and Lakshmana had gone to the forest and Bharata and 
Satrughna were far away in their uncle’s place. It was decided to 
send for Bharata and to keep the body immersed in oil till his arrival. 

The great monarch’s remains were thus kept waiting for Bharata’s 
arrival. Ayodhya, the City of Splendour, was sunk in darkness and 
lamentation. Crowds of women met here and there and reviled 
Kaikeyi. There was anxiety in men’s hearts. The Crown-prince 
had gone to the forest. Bharata too was far away. Anarchy was 
feared, for no one in those days could imagine a people going on 
without a king. 

After the long night had passed, the ministers, officers and elders 
assembled in the hall in the morning. Maarkandeya, Vaamadeva, 
Kaashyapa, Kaatyaayana, Gautama, Jaabaali and other learned 
men, with Sumantra and the other ministers, bowed to Vasishtha 
and said : 

“ Sir, the night we have passed was like a century. The King 
is no more. Raama and Lakshmana are in the forest. Bharata 
and Satrughna are in far-off Kckaya in their grandfather’s house. 
Some one must forthwith be asked to take up the responsibility of 
rule. A land without a king cannot survive. Order will disappear, 
son will not obey father, nor wife her husband. The rains will hold 
back. Thieves and robbers will range at will. There will be no 
mutual trust among people. Neither agriculture nor trade can flourish. 
Without a king, the land must lose its prosperity. The springs of 
charity will dry up. Festivals and services will cease to be performed 
in temples. There will be no expounding of Shaastras or epics, nor 
any listeners. People will no more sleep with doors open. Culture 
will decline and soon disappear. Penances, vows, enjoyments, 
learning—all depend on the king’s protection. The beauty of women 
will vanish. The sense of security will be lost. Men will eat one 
another up as fish do. Cruelty and misery will grow apace and lay 
waste the land. For good to prosper and evil to be restrained, a king 
is essential.’* 

Thus Vaalmeeki describes at length the dangers of anarchy 
through the mouths of leaders in that assembly. 

“ It look as if a great darkness has enveloped the land,” they 
said. “ Dharma is in danger. Let us forthwith secure a king.” 

Vasishtha sent for tried messengers and said to them : “ Start 
at once. Go straight and swift to Kekaya. See that you wear no 
sign of sorrow on your face or show it in your behaviour. Bharata 
should not know that the King is dead. Tell him simply that the 
faintly preceptor and ministers want his presence at once in Ayodhya 



96 


RAAM A A Y ANA 


and bring him along with you with all the speed you may. Tell him 
nothing about Raama and Seeta going to the forest or the King’s 
death on account of grief. To avoid all suspicion, take with you the 
usual gifts of jewels and precious garments for presentation to the 
King of Kekaya.” 

From this we can understand the meaning of what the Shaastras 
and Kural say about Truth. Truthfulness should be such that it 
needlessly hurts no being in the world. The test for right conduct 
including truthfulness is harmlessness. This does not mean that 
truth is underrated. 

Soon the messengers were provisioned and equipped for the long 
journey and furnished with the gifts of honour. Mounted on swift 
and sturdy horses, they sped past rivers and forests, up hill and down 
dale, and reached Kekaya, which was somewhere to the west of the 
modern Punjab, and found themselves in Raajagriha, its capital, 
where the Ikshvaaku princes were residing in. the palace of their 
maternal uncle. They decided to wait on the princes the next 
morning. 

The night the messengers arrived, Bharata had evil dreams and 
woke up in the morning filled with anxiety as to what they might 
portend. His face showed the state of his mind. His companions 
tried to entertain him with dance and mirth to make him forget his 
cares, but did not succeed. 

We still do not know all the secrets of nature and the telepathy 
of affection. May be, Dasaratha’s mental anguish and death-throes 
reached Bharata across space and caused him his bad dreams. He 
said to himself: “ It seems to me that death is approaching my 

brother Raama or Lakshmana or myself. They say that an early 
morning dream does not fail to be fulfilled. And mine has been a 
terrible dream. I am full of fear. 1 know not what to do.” 

Just then the messengers were announced. The King of Kekaya 
and his son Yudhaajit received the envoys with due courtesy. They 
paid their respects to the King and the princes, then turned to 
Bharata and said : 

44 The priests and ministers send you their blessings and request 
you to return at once to Ayodhya. They want us to convey to you 
that the need for your presence there is most urgent. Please touch 
for acceptance these garments and jewels to be given to your uncle 
and to the King as gifts from the palace of Ayodhya.” 

Bharata questioned the messengers after the welfare of all at 
home. The manner of his enquiry suggests that he had an uneasy 
premonition that his mother’s head-strong and ambitious nature 
might have had something to do with this hasty summons home. 



BHARATA ARRIVES 


97 


4 ‘ And is my mother, the haughty and irascible Queen Kaikeyi who 
believes herself all-wise and must always have her way—is she in 
good health ?” 

The messengers must have been at their wits’ end for an answer. 
The best they could make was : “ O tiger among men, all are well 

whose welfare is dear to you. Lakshmi, the goddess of sovereignty, 
whose abode is the lotus, woos you. Get into your chariot without 
loss of time.” There was an enigmatic thought in this greeting, for 
according to them Bharata was to be installed on the throne. 

The prince took leave of his uncle and grandfather for returning 
home and preparations were made for his departure. The old king 
and Yudhaajit collected rare and valuable things of their country to be 
sent as gifts to King Dasaratha and Prince Raama of Ayodhya. 
Bharata and Satrughna mounted their chariots and started with a big 
retinue towards Ayodhya. They travelled fast, unmindful of fatigue, 
and by forced marches reached Ayodhya on the morning of the 
eighth day. 

As he approached the city, Bharata’s mind was filled with mis¬ 
giving. Nothing seemed to be as it was before, and the air seemed 
heavy with disaster. He asked the charioteer : 44 Why does the 
city wear such a strange look ? 1 do not see the usual crowds of 
people going in and coming out. In the gardens outside the city 
one used to see young men and women with bright, cheerful faces. 
But now they all seem sad.” 

Bharata’s chariot entered the city through the Victory Gate. 
The streets, houses and temples were bare and unadorned. The 
faces of the people looked drawn and famished. 

44 Why are the musical instruments silent ?” he asked. 44 Why 
are the citizens not decked with flowers and sandal paste ? These 
are all bad signs. I cannot repress my anxiety.” 

Inauspicious omens were seen everywhere. Bharata concluded 
that some great misfortune had overtaken the city and that was the 
reason why he had been so hastily sent for. He entered Dasaratha’s 
palace. The King was not to be seen. His anxiety increased. 

He then entered Kaikeyi’s palace. When she saw her son after 
a long absence, she jumped from her golden couch to embrace him. 
He bent down and touched her feet She kissed his head and wel¬ 
comed him with maternal blessings, 

44 Did you have a good journey ?” she asked. 44 Are your uncle 
and grandfather well ? Tell me all about them.” 

He answered : 44 The journey took seven days. All our people 
at Kekaya are happy and well. Grandfather and uncle send you 
their love. They have sent rich gifts for you, but these will arrive 



98 


RAAMAAYANA 


later. I have come in advance. The envoys hurried me, saying 
there was urgent work demanding my presence here. What is all 
this about ? I went to the King’s palace to pay him my respects. 
He was not to be found there and here too his couch is empty. Per¬ 
haps he is with one of my senior mothers. I must go and see him 
and tender my respects.” 

When Bharata, innocent of heart and unaware of what had 
happened, said this, the foolish queen intoxicated with a new sense of 
power answered : “ My child, your father had his full share of the 
blessings of this life. His fame was great. He performed all the 
sacrifices enjoined by tradition. He was a refuge for the good. He 
has now entered the higher world and joined the gods.” 

On hearing this, Bharata fell down uttering a cry, his long arms 
stretched out on the ground. Rising, he looked at his father’s empty 
bed and sobbed like a destitute orphan. The mighty hero threw 
his god-like frame on the earth and wept like a child in uncontrolled 
grief. 

Looking at her son, who lay on the ground like a big tree fallen 
to the axe, Kaikeyi said : 

“ Arise, O king. Stand up. It is not right for a king thus to 
mourn and roll on the ground. Honour and glory are waiting for 
your acceptance. You are to uphold the dharma and perform sacri¬ 
fices in the way of your royal fathers. Your intelligence shines like 
the noonday sun. No misfortune dare come near you. Son, strong 
of limb and brave-hearted, stand up.” 

• Bharata’s mind was immaculate, spotless. He did not see all 
that Kaikeyi had put in this her appeal ! 

After lamenting long, he got up and said : ” When I went to 
my uncle’s house I had hoped that Raama’s installation as Yuvaraaja 
would come off soon and that on my return I would see the great 
festive ceremonies. How differently nave things turned out ! How 
am I to bear this calamity ? No more shall I see my father’s face. 
What did he die of ? How did he get the illness ? And I was not 
by his side when he lay sick ! It was given to Raama to tend him in 
his last moments. How affectionate the King was towards me ! If 
some dust settled on my body, he would wipe it with his hand. And 
how soft and pleasing was his touch 1 And it was not given me to 
serve him in nis need. But, mother, where is Raama ? Hereafter 
he is both father and preceptor to me. I must see him at once and 
kiss his feet. He is now my sole refuge. What was my father’s last 
message to me? I want his very words.” 

Kaikeyfs answer had to be consistent both with trath and her 
designs. She was pulled in contrary directions by her culture and her 



BHARATA ARRIVES 


99 


ambition. She found words which conveyed that the King did not 
think of Bharata in his last moments. She also wished to prepare 
him for the rest of the news. She said : “ Your father breathed his 

last crying, ‘ Ha, Raama, Ha, Lakshmana, Ha, Jaanaki.’ These were 
his last words. He died saying : “ It is not given me to live to see 

Raama, Lakshmana and Seeta return. Happy they who will see 
their return.” 

Listening to this, Bharata gathered that Raama and Lakshmana 
too were absent from the King’s side. His grief increased and he 
asked Kaikeyi: “ Where were they? What business took them away 
from our father’s side during his last moments ?” 

Hoping to pacify him, Kaikeyi said : 44 My son, Raama put 
on the garments of an ascetic and, taking Lakshmana and Seeta 
with him, went to the Dandaka forest.” 

Bharata’s amazement now knew no bounds. He asked : “ I 

understand nothing of what you are saying. What sin did Raama 
commit that he should undertake such an expiation ? Did he rob 
any Bhraahmana or cause bodily hurt to any innocent person or desire 
somebody else’s wife ? Why did he have to go to the forest ? Who 
laid on him this penance ?” 

In those days people went of their own will or were sent to the 
forest as a purifying punishment for such and other heinous crimes. 
Now Kaikeyi shaken out of silerice by this tempest of questions came 
out with the truth foolishly hoping for the best. 

“ Raama committed no crime. He neither robbed nor harmed 
anyone. And it was not in Raama’s nature to cast eyes of desire 
at other people’s wives. What happened was that, seeing that prepa¬ 
rations were afoot for installing him as Crown-prince and regent, 
I approached the King for your sake and secured the fulfilment of 
two boons he had long ago granted to me. I asked that the kingdom 
should go to you and that Raama should be exiled to the forest. 
Bound by his past promise, the King agreed. Raama has therefore 
gone to the forest with Seeta and Lakshmana. Unable to bear this 
separation, your father expired of grief. Do not waste yourself in 
vain lamentations now. Think now what you should do. You 
know dharma. Your duty is to accept the burden of kingship. I did 
all this for your sake and you should*accept the fruit of my action in 
the spirit in which I acted. The city and kingdom have come into 
your possession without your wanting or working for it. Following 
the injunctions of Vasishtha and other learned men, perform duly 
your father’s obsequies and then prepare for the coronation. You 
are a kshatriya. You have inherited your father’s kingdom. Attend 
to what has fallen to you as your duty.” 



CHAPTER XXV 


INTRIGUE WASTED 

Now Bharata understood everything and realised the enormity of 
the harm wrought by his mother. 

Overwhelmed by grief and anger, he could not control himself. 
As the thought of what she had done and the eternal infamy she 
had incurred, his grief grew wild and he hurled cruel words at 
her. 

“ What have you done ?” he cried. “ Did you ever hope to 
make me accept the kingdom ? Deprived of such a father and such 
a brother, am I likely to care for power ? After causing the death 
of the King and the banishment of Raama, you ask me to take their 
place and rule the land. This is like pouring oil into the fire of my 
grief. How unfortunate was my father to have chosen you for a 
wife ! Kausalya and Sumitra will also die of grief. Oh, how could 
you bring yourself to do this to Raama who was so devoted to you ? 
Revered mother Kausalya treated you like her own blood-sister. 
How could you think of plotting against her beloved son ? And did 
you not know how much I loved Raama ? Greed destroyed your 
understanding. How else could you so foolishly plan for my hap¬ 
piness ? Even the great King relied on Raama and Lakshmana. 
How could you believe that in their absence I could rule the kingdom ? 
And, even if I could, would I agree ? Never will your wish be fulfilled 
through my co-operation. I can no longer regard you as my mother. 
I cut myself off from all relation with you and decline to regard you 
as my mother. 

“ How could you ever think of setting aside rule and custom 
and getting a younger son crowned ? Would not the world revile 
us for all time ? The general law of kings and the tradition of our 
family cannot be violated. I will not carry out your wish. I shall 
go to the forest and bring Raama back. I shall set the crown on his 
head and rejoice in being his loyal servant.” 

To understand Bharata’s feelings, we should keep in mind his 
innate noble nature, his love for Raama, his grief for his father and the 
sense of guilt and shame that for his sake his mother had done this 
grievous wrong. We should not weigh his words in dry air and a 
chemical balance. In such contexts, poetry flashes fire. One sees it 
both in Vaalmeeki and Kamban. 

Bharata raised his voice and spoke again : “ Banish Raama 
indeed ! It is you that ought to be banished, cruel woman* who 
have forsaken the path of dharma. So far as you are concerned 



INTRIGUE WASTED 


101 


you may take it that I am dead, for I would rather be dead than be 
son to a murderess ! 

“ Murderess of your husband ! You are not the daughter of 
the good King Asvapati. You are a Raakshasi. To what hell should 
you go, you, who banished the only child of mother Kausalya ? What 
punishment would be too great for the grief you have caused her ? 

“ Kaamadhenu, the cow-mother had hundreds of thousands of 
children, yet she shed tears at the sight of the suffering of two bulls 
yoked to a plough and her tears scalded Indra on his throne in high 
Heaven. And Kausalya’s only child you sent to the forest, hoping 
thus that you and I could be made happy ! 

“ I shall do the obsequies and go to the forest and fall at the 
feet of Raama and bring him to his kingdom. And then, to cleanse 
myself of the sin and the shame you have brought on me, I shall 
lead the life of an ascetic in the Dandaka forest. 

44 What a flood of sorrow have you let loose on the earth ? By 
what penitence, by what self-mortification, can you redeem yourself ? 
I shall go myself at once to Raama and get rid of my guilt by restoring 
the kingdom to him.” 

Finding no relief for his anguish by angry words, sighing like 
a young elephant newly captured, hot tears falling from his eyes, 
he felt he could bear no longer the sight of his mother and rushed 
to Kausalya’s apartment, there to find a better place to give vent to 
his sorrow. 

Thus did Kaikeyi’s castle in the air go up in smoke. She lay 
down on the floor and wept. 4 The most painful of all reflexions is 
that of a crime perpetrated in vain.’ 

Among the characters in the Raamaayana , Bharata is the perfect 
embodiment of virtue. In the villages of the North, the people 
celebrate an annual festival for the episode of the meeting of Raama 
and Bharata at Chitrakoota, which they consider the most sanctifying 
part of the Raamaayana epic. There have been through the ages 
great and noble souls whose virtue shines eternally in the midst of 
the sordid self-seeking of a sinful world, as a beacon tight to seekers 
of the right path, and as a token of the god in man. 

Soon the news of Bharata’s arrival spread throughout the palace. 
Kausalya, still labouring under her grief, heard this, and was glad 
and told Sumitra, 44 Come, let us go and meet Bharata.” Hardly 
had they taken a couple of steps when they saw Bharata himself rushing 
wildly towards them to plead for mercy. 

Kausalya’s first thought wlien she heard of Bharata’s arrival 
was that he had hastened back* to assume the fortune which had come 
to him* Had not the eiders and ministers, led by Vasishtha, decided 



102 


RAAMAAYANA 


to send for Bharata so that he might perform his father’s obsequies 
and be crowned King ? Hence, seeing Bharata, Kausalya, her heart 
desolate with her loss of husband and son, said in a low voice : 
“ Bharata, the kingship is waiting secured for your sakfe by Kaikeyi. 
You need not fear any let or hindrance from us. Take it, and may 
all happiness be yours. Only one boon I crave of you—to let 
me join your father on the funeral pyre.” 

These words were like stinging poison in Bharata’s ears. He 
fell at her feet and clung to them, unable to speak. 

Kausalya said again : “Oh Bharata, at least take me where 
Raama is in the forest.” 

Unable to bear all these piteous words of Kausalya and unable 
to speak, Bharata fell into a swoon. After a while he sat up and said : 
“ Mother, why do you thus torture me who am innocent ? You 
know I was far away and knew nothing of the wicked things going on 
here. Do you not know the love I bear for Raama ? Would I ever 
do such a thing to him ? May all the sins of the world descend on me 
if I had the least notion of the evil brewing here ! I had nothing 
to do with it. I have no desire to reap its fruit.” 

He raised his hands and recited all the horrible sins that one 
could commit and invoked on himself the punishments due to them 
if he had any part in the plot. 

In those days as now it was hard for a son to prove that he knew 
nothing of a scheme carried out by his mother for his benefit. Bharata 
could only swear his innocence again and again. He cared nothing 
for kingdom or wealth or power and it was a terrible torment to him 
that Kausalya should think him capable of greed for them at the 
expense of his brother. Indeed such a thought was hardly less cruel 
and unjust than Raama’s exile I He could never accept the crown 
which was his beloved brother’s birthright. 

His passionate sincerity convinced Kausalya of the injustice 
of her suspicions, and her heart went out to him. Tenderly she 
raised him from the ground and took his head on her lap and caressed 
him as though he were Raama himself. 

” My dear son, my grief is doubled by seeing the pain raging 
in your innocent heart. What shall we do, child ? We are the play¬ 
things of fate. May the reward of goodness come to you in this 
world and the next!” * 

* Kausalya had not believed Bharata privy to the plot, but she 
feared that he would condone it and yield to the temptation of to 
results. Now she was convinced that Bharata’s heart was completely 
free from stain. Though her own son had gone to the forest, she 
was pleased that such another son had come to her in his place. 



INTRIGUE WASTED 


103 


Here, Kamban beautifully sings how Kausalya shed tears of 
joy over Bharata and embraced him imagining that Raama himself 
had returned from the forest. Kausalya said amidst her sobs : 
“ Many were your ancestors who attained fame. You have sur¬ 
passed them all in glory by renouncing the kingship that has come 
to you. You are indeed King among kings.” 

The Kausalya and Bharata portrayed by Kamban embody a 
culture. May these heroic figures and that culture live for ever in 
the land of Bharata ! 

The obsequies of the dead King were duly performed. Vasishtha 
and other learned men and elders offered grave shaastric consolation 
to Bharata and Satrughna. Fourteen days after the King’s demise, 
the ministers called the Assembly and addressed Bharata thus : 

“ The King has gone to the world above. Raama and Lakshmana 
are in the forest. The land is now without a king. It is right that 
you should assume the rule at our request. The preparations for the 
coronation are all complete. The citizens and ministers are awaiting 
your acceptance. This is your kingdom lawfully descended from your 
ancestors. It is for you to be anointed and rule righteously over us.” 

Bharata went with folded hands round the materials gathered 
for the coronation and said in grave tones to the assembled elders : 

“ I do not consider it proper that you should ask me thus to 
accept the kingdom. According to the custom of our House, the 
throne belongs to the eldest son. With all respect to you, 1 have 
decided to go to the forest and bring Raama back to Ayodhya with 
Lakshmana and see that Raama is crowned. Please get ready the 
men and materials for this purpose. Prepare the road for the journey. 
Let labourers be mobilised for it. It is my final and irrevocable 
decision not to accept the crown.” 

Listening to the prince’s words, the whole assembly was beside 
itself with joy. They applauded Bharata’s suggestion. 

The army and a big retinue were got ready to accompany the 
prince to the forest. Quickly an army of workers with their tools 
went forward to prepare the road. Men who knew the forest, pioneers 
who could dig wells and canals, builders of rafts and boats, carpenters 
and engineers, worked enthusiastically, because they were engaged 
in getting beloved Raama back. Culverts were built, trees felled, a 
broad road for the prince and his retinue was soon laid. Ups and 
downs were levelled, marshes drained, resting places for the army and 
facilities for drinking water and all other conveniences were soon 
made ready. 

Though thus preparations were made for Bharata’s journey to 
the forest, Vasishtha and the other ministers formally summoned 



104 


RAAMAAYANA 


the Assembly again. They did not give up their desire to get Bharata 
to agree to be crowned. They sent messengers to Bharata’s palace 
and invited him to the Hall. They approached him with music 
playing on many instruments. All this pained him. 

He stopped the musicians and sent the messengers back and told 
Satrughna : “ Why should they still persist in tormenting me when 
1 have refused the kingdom ? This is the result of our mother’s 
intrigue. My father has gone to Heaven leaving me to bear all this 
alone. The land needs a king ; without one it drifts like a rudderless 
and derelict ship. We must soon get Raama back.” 

The Assembly sat eagerly looking for the entrance of the blameless 
prince. He entered the Hall as the full moon rises in the sky. He 
bowed to the elders and sat down. 

Vasishtha said : “ This kingdom has been given to you by your 
father and your brother Raama ; accept it and protect us according 
to ancient custom.” 

Bharata’s heart was far away with Raama. Tears fell from 
his eyes. The young prince wept aloud in the midst of the royal 
Assembly and in a voice struggling with tears, he addressed words 
of respectful reproach to the preceptors : 

” How can you ask one of my race and upbringing to usurp 
what belongs to another far nobler and more worthy than I ? Can 
any son of Dasaratha possibly dream of such iniquity ? This king¬ 
dom, and I, and all else in it belong to Raama. He is the eldest son, 
the noblest among us, a lover of dharma , an equal to Dileepa and 
Nahusha of old. He is the rightful king. He is fit to be sovereign 
of the three worlds. Standing here I pay my homage to Raama there 
in the forest. He is the King, not I !” 

The Assembly burst into tears of joy when they heard Bharata 
speak thus. 

And Bharata continued : “ If I am unable to persuade King 
Raama to agree, I shall stay there performing penance. It is your 
duty, O Elders, to use every means to bring Raama back. I shall 
do all I can to make Raama come back to Ayodhya and make him 
King.” 'X 

He then ordered Sumantra who was standing near him to hasten 
the preparations for going to the forest. The city rejoiced in anti¬ 
cipation of Raama’s return, for all felt sure that nothing could resist 
the force of Bharata’s dutiful love. 



CHAPTER XXVI 


BHARATA SUSPECTED 

Gazing across the river Ganga, Guha, the hunter-king, noticed 
unusual commotion on the bank opposite. A great army had en¬ 
camped there. He pointed it to his kinsmen standing by his side 
and said : 

“ Who is this and why has he come here with a large army, 
apparently to cross the river ? The flag suggests that it is Kaikeyi’s 
son, Bharata and his army. Yes, I see the flag flying on the top of 
the chariot and I can recognise the tree painted on it. That is the 
flag of the King of Ayodhya. 

44 Is not Raama’s enemy, Bharata, the King of Ayodhya today ? 
Having secured the kingdom unjustly through his mother Kaikeyi, 
it looks as though he has pursued Raama here to slay him. Get 
together our warriors and kinsmen and friends. Let them stand 
ready on this bank. Gather all the boats and fill them with armed 
men ready for battle. Let us wait and see. If the new-comers are 
well disposed towards Raama, we shall help them to cross the river and 
come over to this side. But, if their intention is hostile, we shall 
prevent them from crossing the Ganga.” 

And so having made all preparations, Guha, in accordance 
with rules of courtesy, took some presents, got into a boat and went 
to meet Bharata. 

On the other bank at the same time Sumantra was telling Bharata : 

44 Look ! Guha, the hunter-king, devoted friend of Raama, has 
come with his people to welcome us. He is the ruler of this region. 
He and his kinsmen are well acquainted with every nook and corner 
of this forest. They could tell us where Raama is to be found and 
lead us safely and swiftly to the place.” 

Meanwhile Guha crossed the stream and, approaching Bharata, 
bowed and said : 44 Though we have been taken by surprise by 
your unexpected visit, still all that is mine here you may consider 
as your own and command me. I consider it an honour to be able 
to welcome and entertain you and your army.” 

Bharata answered : 44 It is very kind of you, O friend of my 
brother, to offer hospitality to such a large army. I wish to proceed 
to the hermitage of Bharadwaaja. We do not know the way, and 
we also need to cross this great river.” 

Guha bowed before him with clasped hands and said politely : 
44 My lord, my servants and myself are ready to go with you and 
act as guides. But you must excuse me for expressing a doubt which 



106 


RAAMAAYANA 


occurs to me on seeing this large army you have brought. Surely 
you have no intentions hostile to Raama? ” 

Pained by these words and from a heart clear and pure as the 
summer sky, Bharata said : “ Alas, what greater shame can come 

to me than this, that men who love Raama should fear and suspect 
me ? Have no misgivings, Guha. Raama is my father now, for 
he has taken the place of my lost father. I have come here to beg 
of him to return to Ayodhya. I swear, I have no other purpose 
in my mind.” 

Guha rejoiced to see in Bharata’s face his intense love for Raama 
and his grief at what had happened. He said : ” My Lord, who in 

the world can equal you in sacrifice ? Who but you would renounce 
such wealth and power coming to him unsought ? Your glory will 
shine for ever.” 

The hunter-king supplied Bharata’s army with all it needed. 
The hosts and the guests retired for the night. 

The meeting with Guha only increased Bharata’s sorrow. 
Bharata was endowed with a heart of utter innocence. He sighed 
and said : “ Alas, that it should come to this,” and rolled sleepless 
on the ground. His whole body burned with thoughts of the infamy 
that had come as a cloud over him, his father’s death and the parting 
from Raama. Guha spoke words of comfort and tried to console 
him. This meeting of Bharata and Guha and the way they shared 
their sorrow is an episode dear to the Vaishnava Aalvaars and other 
true Bhaktas. 

Bharata questioned : “ What food did Raama take when he 
was here ? Where did he sit ? Where did he sleep ? What did he 
say ? And what did he do ?” 

Guha answered every question lovingly and pointed the spot 
where Raama had slept. And when he was asked, 44 Where did 
Lakshmana sleep ?” he replied : ‘‘Lakshmana said, 4 When Raama 
and Seeta lie stretched on the bare earth, how can I sleep V and 
he shed tears and, like me, stood on guard the whole night, bow in 
hand.” 

As Bharata pictured this scene, his grief became unendurable. 
He saw the spot where Raama and Seeta had slept that night and 
pointed it to the weeping queens. 

Asked what Raama ate, Guha answered : “ My lord, they 
fasted that night. Lakshmana brought some water and Raama 
drank of it and handed it back to Lakshmana to drink. The food 
I brought was returned untasted. The following morning, they 
matted their locks and walked into the forest.” 

Bharata had found some relief from sorrow in his resolve to 



BHARATA SUSPECTED 


107 


seek out Raama and persuade him to return, but his talk with Guha 
and the sights he saw brought it back in full flood. 

“ For my sake, Raama, you slept on the grass. I have seen 
the spot and still live. And they want me to wear a crown, on top 
of all this !” Thus he lamented inconsolably. 

Then he told himself: “ I shall somehow take Raama back 
and seat him on the throne. If he wants his vow fulfilled, I shall 
replace him in the forest for fourteen years. He will agree to this 
arrangement as it is only right and proper.” Thus he calmed himself. 

Early next morning, Bharata woke up Satrughna : “ What ? 
Are you still asleep ? The day has already dawned. The army 
has to cross the river. We should send quickly for Guha and arrange 
for the journey.” 

Satrughna answered : “ I am not asleep, brother. Like you I 

spent the whole night thinking of Raama.” 

While they were speaking, Guha arrived and after courteous 
greetings, announced that he had a fleet of many boats ready. All 
the baggage and the whole army were put on boats. The loaded 
vessels crossed the great river. The transport across raised a joyous 
clamour like some great festival. 

The people did not see the sorrow in Bharata’s heart, for they 
had concluded, even when Bharata set out, that Raama would surely 
return. They went forward rejoicing that soon Raama would be 
in their midst as crowned king and all their recent sorrows would 
pass like a bad dream. 

Vaalmeeki describes the scene on the bank of the Ganga in a 
way that recalls to one a crowded railway station during a popular 
festival. When the whole army had crossed the river, Bharata followed 
it in a boat specially fitted up for him. 

They reached the aashrama of Bharadwaaja. 

The story of Bharata in the Raamaayana portraying a character 
of unrivalled purity and sublime selflessness is something more than 
an episode, and stands out by itself even in that noble epic, as holy 
shrines do on the banks of the Ganga. It uplifts the heart, and gives 
one a glimpse of the heights to which human nature can rise when 
cleansed by love and devotion. Whether Raama and Bharata were 
incarnations of the Deity or merely supreme creations of a nation’s 
imagination this episode is among the masterpieces of the world’s 
literature. 

Jnaana md bhafcti will automatically grow by a contemplation 
of the personality of Bharata. In order to recreate the scene and 
the persons in his own mind the reader must bring into play his reverent 
We bring with us into this world as our inborn gift 



108 


RAAMAAYANA 


*ome wisdom and reverence. This gift is always in us and though 
sometimes obscured by prejudice or passion it keeps alive the divine 
in man which prevents him from reeling back into the beast. 

Bharata and his retinue went on towards Bharadwaaja’suas^ru/wa. 
When they reached the Prayaaga wood, they saw at a distance a 
beautiful grove with a cottage in its midst. Learning that this was 
Bharadwaaja’s aashrama , Bharata left his retinue behind and* accom¬ 
panied only by Vasishtha and a few other elders, walked towards it 
with due humility. Divesting himself of his silk garments and his 
weapons, and accompanied only by the ministers he went on foot 
behind Vasishtha. A little further on, he left behind even the ministers, 
and he and Vasishtha alone went forward. 

When Bharadwaaja saw Vasishtha, he rose from his seat and 
went to meet the illustrious visitor and bade his disciples to bring the 
customary water for the feet of the guests. 

Bharata offered humble salutations to Bharadwaaja. Learning 
who he was, the rishi received him with the respect due to a king and 
made enquiries concerning his welfare. He thoughtfully refrained 
from making any mention of the sad fate of Dasaratha. 

The narration that follows is as told in Vaalmeeki’s epic. A few 
words by way of explanation may be useful. Bharadwaaja suspected 
and questioned Bharata, just as Guha had done earlier. This is, 
however, not so put in Tulasi Raamaayana which is a poem of pure 
4 Bhakti.’ There is nothing that was not within the knowledge of 
rishis. How then could Bharadwaaja (in Tulasi Raamaayana) entertain 
any doubt about Bharata ? 

Kamban, the Tamil poet of Raamaayana , follows Vaalmeekl 
closely not only here but in many other places where Tulasi differs* 
Although Kamban carefully follows Vaalmeeki, he adds many beauti¬ 
ful passages out of his own imagination. With a touch here and a 
touch there, Kamban manages skilfully to disentangle many knots* 
The changes he makes are very few, while Tulasi deals freely with 
the story, taking such liberties as he likes with the story as a great 
4 bhakta * may who has made his god his own by self-forgetting sur¬ 
render. 

Following Vaalmeeki, Kamban reports the conversation between 
Bharadwaaja and Bharata and very beautifully expresses Bharata*® 
indignation. 

We may not, reading it all today, appreciate Bharadwaaja*® 
doubts about innocent Bharata. Such suspicion was perfectly natural 
to Guha, but not so in a wise rishi. Vaalmeeki makes the rM/justify 
himself, saying : “ Don’t I know you, young prince ? ! put you 
these questions only the more clearly to reveal your ** 



BHARATA SUSPECTED 


109 


Vaalmccki pictures r is his not as omnicient sages, but as very 
human wise men and seekers after truth, liable to love and fear some¬ 
what like the rest of us. Just as Vaalmeeki delineates Raama as a hero 
rather than as an avataar , so he makes Bharadwaaja doubt Bharata 
because of his tender affection for Raama. Bound by his attachment 
to Raama, he hurts Bharata ; seeing the latter suffer, he at once 
consoles him with an explanation. 

All Vaalmeeki’s characters are human beings with heightened 
human qualities. It is only under great stress or in exceptional 
circumstances that divinity shines faintly through the human nature. 
In the time of Tulasidaas, bhakti had reached its noon-day height. 
It shone dispelling every shade. Though bhakti predominates in 
Kamban’s picture also, he contrives to retain the humanity of Vaal- 
meeki’s characters and in places makes them even more beautiful. 

Bharadwaaja after making the usual personal enquiries, asked 
Bharata : “ Why did you leave your kingly duties and go over here ? 

Should you not stay in Ayodhya ? Listening to his young wife, 
Dasaratha ordered Raama to live for fourteen years in the forest 
and the Prince accordingly left the city with his brother and Seeta. 
Do you feel that even now the way is not clear for your rule and 
have you come to complete what Dasaratha began and make assu¬ 
rance doubly sure ?” 

Hearing these words, Bharata wept. The tears gushed and he 
could hardly speak. 44 Death,” he said : 44 would be better than such 
a life as this.” 

44 Do you doubt me, master ?” he asked : 144 Do not blame me 
for what was done by my mother In my absence without my knowledge 
or consent. I have come now to do my utmost and persuade Raama 
to go back with me to Ayodhya, and there to be crowned King. And 
it is my purpose to be his humble slave all my life. I have come here 
to ask you where Raama dwells, to go and beg of him to return home. 
And me, you suspect !” 

Bharadwaaja said : 44 Bharata, I know your real nature. You 
are a scion of the race of Raghu. I questioned you because I wished 
to draw out a revelation of your affection and loyalty and thereby 
establish and spread your glory. Do not grieve. The Prince is 
dwelling on Chitrakoota hill. Stay here today. Tomorrow, you 
and your ministers shall go there. You will please me by accepting 
hospitality for a day in the aashrama 

Bharata said : 44 My Lord, your wishes and words of affection 
are a feast. What more is required ?” 

Bharadwaaja smiled because he could see that Bharata was 
unwilling to cast the burden of feeding an army on a poor ascetic. 





no 


RAAMAAYANA 


He said : “I am bound to entertain you in a manner worthy of 
your status and goodness. Why have you left behind your army and 
retinue ?” 

Bharata answered : “I followed the rule that one should not 
approach a rishCs dwelling with a retinue. There is a big crowd 
following me. It would be a great disturbance to you if they all 
come here.” 

The rishi said : “ Nothing of the sort. Order them all to come 

up.” 

And so Bharata ordered. 

Bharadwaaja went to the sacrificial fire and, uttering mantras , 
sipped water thrice and called on Viswakarma, Maya, Yama, Varuna, 
Kubera, Agni and other celestial beings and ordered them to produce 
a great feast for Bharata and his followers. 

Then a miracle happened. The feast that was ready in Bhara- 
dwaaja’s aashrama was like that which Vasishtha gave of old to 
Viswaamitra. The only difference was that here, there was no quarrel 
or commotion. Every one had ample accommodation. Sandal 
paste, flowers, food and drink, music and dance by divine performers, 
were all provided. Bharadwaaja’s feast was more sumptuous than 
that given by emulous kings to one another. Dwellings, vehicles, 
servants rose suddenly into being. Tffe guests forgot themselves in 
the feast. The soldiers in Bharata’s army in the ecstasy of present 
enjoyment exclaimed to one another : “We shall not go to the 
Dandaka forest. We shall not return to Ayodhya. We shall stay 
here for ever.” 

How were they to know that the good things they enjoyed were 
for a day, and would disappear at dawn, like the stage and the crowd 
after a village play is over ? 

The guests were full and soon fell fast asleep. 

The following morning Bharadwaaja said to Bharata : “ At a 
distance of two-and-a-half yojanas from here runs thd river Mandaa- 
kini. On its banks is an unpeopled forest with Chitrakoota hill to 
its south. On the slope of the hill, in a hut your brothers end Seeta 
are dwelling.” And he explained in detail the way they should follow. 

The three queens were presented to receive the sage’s blessings. 
“This is QueenKausalya,” saidBharata, “ the mother of Raama and 
here, to her right and supporting her, stands the mother of Lakshmana 
and Satrughna sorrow-stricken and limp like a creeper stricken by 
summer winds. “ And here is my mother, the cause of all our sorrow, 
said Bharata, pointing to Kaikeyi who along with the other Queens 
prostrated before the sage. 

“ Do not judge your mother harshly,” said Bharadwaaja casting 



THE BROTHERS MEET 


111 


his gentle eyes on the sorrowing lady. “ All that has happened has 
happened for the good of the world.” 

This episode of introducing the mothers is placed by Kamban 
in the earlier scene with Guha. Guha reverently inquires about the 
queens and Bharata explains. What Vaalmeeki describes as having 
taken place in Bharadwaaja’s aashrama is, with more poetical effect, 
transferred by Kamban to its proper place. 

Introducing Kausalya to Guha, Bharata says, in the Raamaayana 
of Kamban : “ This is the mother of Raama. Her treasure was 
Raama and she lost it because of me.” Of Sumitra, he said : ” This 
is the mother of Lakshmana, truer brother to Raama who has a 
happiness beyond the reach of poor me.” Kaikeyi in Kamban, 
as in Vaalmeeki, is introduced by Bharata in harsh terms. 

Bharata and his great retinue took the forest path as directed 
by Bharadwaaja. They saw from afar the Chitrakoota hill and as 
they proceeded eagerly a column of smoke indicated the spot where 
the Prince’s dwelling was and shouts of joy arose from the crowd. 
Leaving his following behind, Bharata went forward accompanied 
only by Sumantra and Vasishtha. 


CHAPTER XXVn 

THE BROTHERS MEET 

While Bharata was thus engaged in trying to undo the mischief 
wrought by others, in the forest hut at Chitrakoota, life went on 
fairly cheerfully. With Lakshmana and Seeta by his side, Raama 
lacked nothing. The grandeur of the mountain scenery and the forest 
and the sweet songs and play of the birds pleased his heart. He 
forgot the sorrow of his exile from kinsfolk and city. 

” Look, Seeta, at those birds playing,” he would say : ” Look 
at that rock on the hill with the blue, yellow and red veins shining 
on it. Look at these plants and creepers with their flowers. We 
feared life in the forest, not knowing how pleasant it would be. I am 
so happy here. And I have in addition to this pleasure the feeling 
that I carry out my father’s promise. We have the joy of duty done 
besides leading a happy life here. Over and above all this, I am happy 
that my brother Bharata is ruling the kingdom.” 

Thus Raama, free from sorrow himself, made Seeta happy. 
Descending from the hill, they would sometimes go to die river Man- 
daakini and spend time there. “ Look at those sand hillocks,” Raama 
would say. ” Look at the swans playing among the lotuses. The 



112 


RAAMAAYANA 


stream is as lovely as yourself, beloved. The fords where animals 
come to drink are beautifully red with new earth. Even the river in 
Kubera’s kingdom cannot be a beautiful as this. See the risks 
bathing there and standing in supplication and offering hymns to 
the sun. Look at the dowers falling from the boughs on the water. 
Look at that pearl-scattering cascade. We are indeed lucky to be 
far away from the crpwded city here in the forest. There, we cannot 
s^e rishis and pure souls such as we see here bathing everyday. This 
hill is our Ayodnya. Tne birds and beasts are our subjects. The 
Mandaakini is our Sarayu. 

44 With you and Lakshmana by me, I am so happy and content. 
How pleasant it is to see the animals drinking water in the stream 
without any fear ! Plunging in the water here, eating fruits and roots, 
walking about in the forest and climbing the hills, wny should 1 think 
of kingdom or power ?” 

Thus, in the company of Seeta and Lakshmana, Raama was 
spending happy days. 

One day as they were sitting as usual on the slope of the hill 
in utter peace, suddenly at a distance, they saw a cloud of dust rise 
in the sky which seemed moving towards them. And soon they 
heard a great noise as of a big crowd. Raama saw the forest animals 
stampeding hither and thither in fear. It looked as if an army entered 
the forest. 

“ Do you hear that noise ? ” Raama said to Lakshmana. “The 
elephants, bisons and deer are running helter-skelter. What could 
it be ? Could it be some king come here hunting ? Or is it that some 
tiger or other fierce wild beast has come rummaging ? Just see and 
tell me.” 

Lakshmana climbed up a tall tree and looked all around. He 
saw a large army approaching from the north, a complete force of 
all hmbs~-chariots, elephants, horses and footsoldiers. He shouted 
to Raama in warning : 

44 Listen, brother. A great army is approaching with flags 
flying and in complete formation. Let us be careful. Put out the 
fire. Take Seeta into the cave for safety. Let us don our armour 
and get ready for battle.” 

Raama said : 44 Do not be in such hurry. Look again at the 
flag on the chariot and tell me which king is leading his army here/’ 

Lakshmana looked and was filled with anger. 44 O my brother, 
it is Bharata. Not satisfied with getting the kingdom, he is pursuing 
us here. I can see the tree on our flag flying in the breeze. He has 
come to slay us ; but the son of Kaikeyi shall not escape with life 
from me today. What sin is there in killing this destroyer of dharma ? 



THE BROTHERS MEET 


113 


The only question now is, shall we wait for them here, or shall we give 
them battle on the top of the hill ? We will make him pay for all the 
harm he has done us. It is surely no sin to kill one who comes to 
slay us. With him will be destroyed the greed of his mother. You 
will soon see the forest paths running with blood. Like a tree up¬ 
rooted by an elephant, Bharata will t>e felled to the ground by me. 
We shall destroy this army. We shall feed fat the beasts of prey in 
the forest.” 

Lakshmana spoke thus, beside himself with rage. 

Raama proceeded to clam him. “ I know you can destroy the 
seven worlds if you are so minded. Listen, you can easily kill Bharata 
and his army, but there is a thing to consider before you set to work. 
Disobeying and disgracing our father and killing our brother and 
earning infinite obloquy, what good shall we gain by battling for and 
winning the kingdom ? What we gain by killing our kinsfolk will 
be like food with which is mixed poison. Why and for whom do we 
seek wealth and kingdom ? Is it not for the sake of others, whose 
joy is our own ? 

“Who would want to acquire a kingdom by wrong means ? 
And what joy is there in a kingdom which you cannot share with 
those you love ? Truly I tell you, I will never look at wealth and 
power that you and Bharata and Satrughna cannot enjoy with me. 

“ I know why Bharata is coming here now and I will tell you. 
He knows the way of dharma . He is coming here to give the kingdom 
to me. If he had been in Ayodhya instead of in the faraway land of 
his uncle he would have dissuaded Kaikeyi, and saved our father 
from the great sorrow which has befallen him. I am certain he is 
coming now to take me back to the city. It is wrong of you to think 
ill of Bharata and speak such harsh words about him. If it is desire 
for the kingdom that makes you so cruel in your suspicion, tell me. 
I have only to tell Bharata to pass it on to you, and I make no doubt 
he will do it with pleasure.” 

Raama said this laughing, and Lakshmana shrank into himself 
with shame. 

44 Perhaps our father, the King,” Lakshmana said, 44 is himself 
coming to see us.” 

After listening to Raama, he was convinced that his fear was 
improper. He wondered then why the army was marching and 
thought that perhaps Dasaratha was coming to visit them in the 
forest and a large retinue followed the King. The commentator 
remarks that Lakshmana, realising his folly in having spoken ill of 
Bharata, was trying by some explanations to cover up his shame, 

Raama cheered up Lakshmana saying : “ Yes, it may be as 



114 


RAAMAAYANA 


you say. Thinking that life in the forest was hard, the King might 
have come to take us, and specially Seeta, back to the city. But 
then, we do not see the King’s great white umbrella. But whatever 
be the case, you should be calm.” 

Lakshmana stood humbly with folded hands by Raama. 

Halting the army at some distance, Bharata sent a few men to 
observe and report on the place whence the smoke rose. They 
brought the news that this was the very spot described by Bharad- 
waaja and that the cottage was very probably Raama’s forest abode. 

Bharata started forward with Satrughna, Vasishtha and Sumantra. 
As they advanced, they saw indications that the aashrama was habited. 
There was a path that led to the river and the trees were blazed on 
either side of it as though to make it easy to find it in the dusk. Pre¬ 
sently they came to a cottage thatched with leaves, near which were 
stacks of faggots and the dry dung of deer and wild buffaloes heaped 
for use in winter. In the cottage, on the walls were mighty bows and 
quivers full of deadly arrows, swords which seemed to radiate victory 
and other weapons all of superlative excellence. They saw also, 
spread out to dry on the branches of trees, garments of bark. Bharata 
beheld all these sure signs of his brothers’ residence in the hermitage 
with a swelling heart. From inside came smoke from the oblations 
of daily worship, and entering, Bharata saw the altar with its blazing 
fire and Raama himself seated by it with matted locks, majestic, 
though in deer-skin and bark, a ruler of the world with his mighty 
arms, breadth of chest and a countenance made to command love 
and obedience. By him were Seeta and Lakshmana. 

He had been thinking all the time of the infamy that had gathered 
on his head, and wondering what to say and what to do when he met 
Raama. But now when he saw Raama, he forgot all this in the great 
love that surged within him and submerged all other thoughts and fears. 
He sprang forward to the spot where Raama was seated. He could 
utter no word beyond 44 Brother,” and fell at his feet, and sobbed. 
By this time, Sumantra and Guha joined him. 

Raama saw before him lying on the ground Bharata with hands 
clasped in supplication, with matted locks and in garments of bark. 
With grief and fasting, his body had grown lean and he was tanned 
with fatigue and exposure. Raama embraced him, and kissed him 
on the head, and said : 44 Brother beloved, why did you leave our 
father’s side and come all this way into the forest ? And why have 
you grown so thin ?” 

Bharata was speechless. Raama put to him the formal questions 
which members of the royal family asked each other when they met 
after an absence. 



THE BROTHERS MEET 


115 


After an interval, Bharata gathered strength and gave answer. 
* k Why question you me about the kingdom, brother, as though I 
were its ruler ? What connection is there between the kingdom and 
myself? When you are the rightful king, how could I call myself 
king, or rule over the land ? My duty is to do you humble service. 
It has not been given to me to do it. The eldest son should bear 
the burden of the kingdom. This is the law and custom. Come 
with me to Ayodhya, wear the crown and shower your grace on our 
family and people. The old King’s work in the world is over and he 
has entered Swarga. When you had left Ayodhya for the forest and 
before I returned from Kekaya the King gave up his life, slain by the 
grief of separation from you. Do not give way to sorrow. Perform 
the obsequies of our father. Thinking of you, he gave up his life. 
The obsequies you perform will alone satisfy his spirit.” Thus Bharata 
steadied himself and spoke. 

When Raama heard that his father was dead, he fell down like 
a tree felled by an axe. Bharata had no need to repeat before Raama 
all the apologies and explanations which he had to give to Kausalya, 
Guha and Bharadwaaja. Where was the need for explanations when 
Raama set his eyes on that grief-stricken body and that ravaged face ? 
Bharata, whose one concern was to take Raama back to Ayodhya, 
spoke only of this and not at all of himself. 

The princes, with Seeta and Sumantra, went to the river and 
offered libations for the peace of the departed soul of the King. 
After other customary ceremonies, the princes returned to the cottage. 
They held each others’ hands and relieved their sorrow by loud 
lamentation. 

(In this episode, where Bharata meets Raama, we read in Vaal- 
meeki a long lecture on the art of government, delivered by Raama 
to his brother. Often in our epics, we come across such long disserta¬ 
tions on politics or morality. Modern fiction gives high priority to 
narrative vigour, dramatic suspense and surprise. In old works, in 
addition to plenty of these qualities, there were generous doses of 
didacticism. It may be added here that even old commentators 
noticed that the chapters of this episode have got mixed up and dis¬ 
placed in Vaalmeeki. Kamban has of course regularised and moder¬ 
nised the narrative. In Tulasidaas the meeting of Raama and Bharata 
is steeped in bhakti and there is no room for any complications). 



CHAPTER XXVIH 


BHARATA BECOMES RAAMA’S DEPUTY 

When it was known that the four princes and the three queens were 
re-united and could be seen together in one place, a chorus of joy 
went up in the army and retinue and they came surging forward to 
witness that happy spectacle. They were sure now that Raama 
would return to Ayodhya and the people embraced one another for 
very joy. 

The sage Vasishtha conducted the three queens to the hut. On 
the way, they saw the river Mandaakini. When he showed them 
the spot where the princes daily took water for their use, Kausalya 
and Sumitra broke down and sobbed. Said Kausalya : 

“ From this pool in the river, Sumitra, your son takes water to 
the aashrama every day. Lakshmana is prepared to do the com¬ 
monest task cheerfully for his brother. He does not mind the weight 
of the water pot on his princely shoulder.” 

They saw the spot where Raama and Lakshmana poured out 
libations for their father’s Spirit. The darbha grass lay with the 
ends facing south, beside the oil-cake. 

Kausalya clung to Sumitra and said : “ O Sister ! This is the 
food that the mightiest kings have to be content with after death.” 

They reached the hut. There they saw the princes with faces 
clouded with sorrow, seated under a thatch-roof. Unable to bear 
the sight, the royal mothers sank to the floor. 

When Raama lifted Kausalya up, she stroked him with her 
flower-soft hands and was at once sad and happy. She embraced 
Seeta and said : ” My child, Janaka’s daughter, daughter-in-law 
to the King of Ayodhya, do you live in this hut in the forest ? O, 
faded lotus-flower ! O, golden image covered with dust ! My 
heart melts at the sight of you.” 

Raama reverently touched the feet of Vasishtha who seemed 
another Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods come down to earth, 
and then sat by his mother. Bharata humbly sat apart facing Raama. 
The elders surrounded them, eagerly awaiting what Bharata would 
say and how Raama would react. 

” Bharata, why have you left your kingly duties and come here 
in deer-skin' and with matted locks ?” asked Raama. 

Bharata attempted to speak several times, but at first could 
not get beyond the word * Brother/ Then he pulled himself together 
with a great effort and said : 

” Sending you to the forest, but unable to bear the pain, our 



BHARATA BECOMES RAAMA’S DEPUTY 


117 


father’s soul fled to heaven. All the good my mother has got from* 
her evil plan has been that she has become a sinner and a widow* 
and is in deep sorrow. Despised by the world, she experiences hell 
on earth. Only you can save us. Undo all the evil that has been 
done and wipe off our tears by agreeing to be crowned. It is to* 
implore you for this that we and the citizens and the army and the 
widowed queens have come and are all here waiting on your word. 
Grant us our prayer. This alone will put an end to our sorrow and 
re-establish the dharnta of our race. Without a rightful king, the land 
is, like a widow desolate and helpless. You must come back and 
make it happy and secure. Like the full moon rising, dispel our 
darkness. The ministers here and I fall at your feet and beg of you. 
Do not refuse, O, brother !” 

Saying this, the great Bharata, with tear-filled eyes, clung to the 
feet of Raamachandra. 

Raama raised him from the ground and embracing him said : 

“ Child, we were born in a noble family and brought up in 
good ways. Neither you nor I can do anything wrong. I see no 
fault in you, my blameless brother ! Do not feel sad and do not 
speak unkind words about your mother. It is not proper that we 
should blame her. Surely, our father had the right to tell us what to 
do, aye, even to decree banishment, just as he had the right to order 
a coronation. Our duty is to honour our father and our mother. 
How could I disobey or question their command ? Was it for rfie to 
refuse my father’s command that I should to go the forest ? 

“ He gave you kingship and he ordained for me life in the forest. 
He certainly had the right to settle the manner of our lives. What 
right have we to alter or reject his plans ? Far from being wrong* 
it is your duty, to rule the land. And I too shall do my duty and 
fulfil our father’s last command by living fourteen years in the Dandaka 
forest. Failing to fulfil our father’s wish, can I find contentment in 
the possession of the whole world ?” 

Bharata repeatedly besought and importuned Raama. Raama 
realised that Bharata grieved that it was for his sake injustice had been 
done and that he endeavoured to remove the blot. 

“Do not blame yourself,” he said. “Do not think that all 
these things took place for your sake. Destiny rules everything. 
Give up your grief. Return to Ayodhya and rule the kingdom. 
Let us each perform the duties assigned to us by the father we love 
and revere/’ 

The people who watched the talk and saw the determination of 
the Prince were filled with joy and sorrow in equal measure. Bharata’a* 
affection and purity filled them with pride and joy. 



118 


RAAMAAYANA 


Raama told Bharata his unalterable decision. 44 I cannot pos¬ 
sibly disobey my father’s word. You will please me by not persisting 
in trying to persuade me. Satrughna is there to help you in ruling 
as Lakshmana is here to help me in forest life. With Lakshmana 
by my side, I lack nothing. Let us all four, brother, do our father’s 
will.” 

The learned Jaabaali, one of the priests who had accompanied 
Bharata, here interposed a lesson on worldly wisdom for the benefit 
of Raama. 44 You talk again and again-of your father’s command. 
Dasaratha was a physical body which has now rejoined the five ele¬ 
ments. You talk as though there is some continuing relationship 
between that person who is now no more and yourself. This is 
sheer illusion. Why do you like the foolish, prate of dharma and seek 
to give up the good fortune to which you were born ? Like a woman 
mourning with dishevelled hair, the city of Ayodhya is plaintively 
longing and waiting for your return. Go back. Accept the crown. 
Enjoy life’s pleasures. Listen to Bharata. Do not fail in your 
proper duties.” 

This lecture angered Raama. He said with much sharpness : 
44 Sir, you seem to set little value on truth and rectitude. Your 
materialist talk fills me with such abhorrence that I wonder that an 
unbeliever like you should have been tolerated in the court.” 

Jaabaali hastened to explain that far from being an infidel, he 
had all his life been a teacher of the Shaastras and that he had only 
spoken as he had done out of an earnest wish to persuade Raama 
to return. Vasishtha also intervened on his behalf and that unlucky 
interlude came to an end. 

Vasishtha then put the case for Raama’s return this way : 

44 On the whole, my opinion is that you should return to Ayodhya 
and accept the throne. Of course, your father’s command also has 
to be considered, and reconciled to this step. You have obeyed that 
command at once and unhesitatingly, but now a new situation has 
arisen. Bharata in his helplessness, fearing infamy, has sought 
shelter at your feet. How can you spurn him ? We all know that 
you love him as your life. You never refuse those who approach 
you for help. How then can you deny it to Bharata now ? Is it not 
your life-principle to help those who seek refuge at your feet ?” 

But Raama showed no signs of relenting. Then, Bharata turn¬ 
ed to Sumantra and said 44 My brother has no pity for me. Please 
spread a bed of darbha grass here for me. I shall take the pledge of 
fasting unto death.” 

Sumantra hesitated and looked at Raama. Then Bharata him¬ 
self fetched and spread the grass and sat on it. 



BHARAT A BECOMES RAAMA’s DEPUTY 


11* 


“My child, this is not right, “said Raama firmly. “Rise. Ga 
to Ayodhya and fulfil your duties. Do not go against Kshatriya 
dharma. 

Bharata got up and as a last resort appealed to the people who 
had accompanied him—a representative crowd of soldiers and citizens 
from Ayodha: “O, citizens of Ayodhya! Why do you stand mutely 
looking on ? Do you not want Raama to return ? Why then are 
you silent ?” 

The people answered^ “Raama will not swerve from truth* 
He will stand firm by his father's promise. He will not return to 
Ayodhya. What is the use of pressing him further ?” 

Raama said : “Listen to them, brother. They wish well by both 
of us. Virtue dwells in their hearts.” 

Bharata said: “Here I am as guiltless as Raama and a fit sub¬ 
stitute for him. If the King’s word should be fulfilled, let me stay 
here in the forest in place of Raama. Let him fill my place and rule 
in Ayodhya.” 

Raama laughed and said: “This procedure of exchange cannot 
apply here. This is not trade or business for barter and agreement. 
It is true that sometimes one discharges the duties of another, when 
the latter is too weak and unable to do it. But how does it fit 
on this occasion ? Can any of you say that for life in the forest I have 
no capacity but only Bharata has?” 

Then the wise Vasishtha found a solution for the problem in which 
righteousness struggled with righteousness as to which should be more 
right. “O, Bharata, rule the kingdom under Raama’s authority and 
as his deputy. No blame would attach to you then and the pledge 
would be kept.” 

Raama took Bharata on his lap and told him: “Brother, look on 
the kingdom as my gift to you. Accept it and rule it as our father 
wished.” 

A glory descended on Raama and Bharata at that moment and 
they shone like two suns. 

Bharata said: “Brother, you are my father and my God. Your 
least wish is my dharma. Give me your sandals. That token of 
yours shall reign in Ayodhya till you return. And for fourteen years 
I shall stay outside the city and discharge the King’s duties in your 
place, paying reverent homage to your sandals. At the end of that 
period, you wiH return and accept the kingship.” 

"So be it,” answered Raama. 

He placed bis feet on the sandals and handed them to Bharata, 
who prostrated himself on the ground and accepted them and put them 
, on ms neSid* 



120 


RAAMAAYANA 


Bharata and his retinue turned back towards Ayodhya. On the 
-way, they met the sage Bharadwaaja and reported what had happened. 
He blessed him saying: 

“Your virtue will for ever be remembered. Are you not a son 
of the Solar race? As water flows downwards, the virtue of your 
family runs its inevitable course in you. Your father Dasaratha 
is indeed happy. He is not dead but lives again immortally in 
you.” 

They met Guha again and crossed the Ganga and reached 
Ayodhya. Bharata and his followers entered Ayodhya. The city, 
bereft of the King and Raama, appeared desolate to Bharata. it 
seemed to be enveloped in the darkness of a moonless night. When 
he returned in haste from Kekaya, he had entered the city in fatigue 
and shapeless fear and suspense; but today he entered it again fully 
realising ail the tragedy. He remembered the past and thought of the 
present and grieved afresh. He went to the palace and took the queens 
to their desolate apartments. He went to the Assembly hall, and said: 
*‘Great is my sorrow. But I shall bear it. I shall stay in Nandigraama 
and carry out my tasks as I have promised Raama. Make all arrange¬ 
ments for this purpose.” 

This was done and he solemnly announced in the Assembly, “This 
kingdon is Raama’s. For the time being, he has asked me to be in 
charge. In my brother’s place I have installed his sandals. Deriving 
my authority from them, I shall do my work as king.” 

Accordingly, Bharata stayed in Nandigraama and with the help 
of ministers ruled the kingdom as a religious duty until Raama should 
return after completing his forest life. And indeed, is it not the law 
laid down in Scripture that one should serve the world unselfishly 
and without attachment, leaving the fruit of one’s work at the feet of 
the Lord? Raama did his penance in the forest for fourteen years 
and all the time Bharata too did his penance at Nandigraama near 
Ayodhya. 


CHAPTER XXIX 

VIRAADHA’S END 

Not far from Chitrakoota was an outpost of the Raakshasas called 
Janasthaana, in charge of a famous warrior named Khara, who was 
a brother of Raavana, and from this station, fierce Raakshasas , ranged 
the forest round, molesting the rishis in their isolated aashramas. They 
made life so insecure that the rishis abandoned their hermitages in the 



viraadha’s end 


m 


Chitrakoota region in spite of all that Raama could do to dissuade* 
them. 

After Bharata’s departure Raama was not quite happy in Chitra¬ 
koota. The face of his beloved brother tearful with disappointment 
and the sad drooping form of his widowed mother were ever before 
his mind’s eye, and now that the going away of the rishis had deprived 
him of even their companionship, the lonely hut was so full of sad 
memories that he made up his mind to seek some other resting place 
in the Dandaka forest. 

So they left Chitrakoota and proceeded to the hermitage of Atri, 
a rishi who knew the country, to seek his advice as to where they might 
establish themselves. They were most affectionately received and 
Seeta won the heart of Atri’s wife, the saintly Anasooya who, delighted 
at finding in her a perfect embodiment of wifely virtues, blessed her 
and presented her with beautiful garments and auspicious cosmetics 
that set out the charms of lovely young wives. 

Anasooya was the embodiment of pure womanhood and her 
gifts added beauty and inner strength to Seeta. She received the 
gifts and said: “My Lord the Prince loves me with the love of a 
mother and a father. I am indeed blessed.” 

Then they made enquiries concerning the way and resumed their 
journey. 

Walking through the great Dandaka forest, Raama, Seeta and 
Lakshmana reached a spot where many rishis lived. Even as they 
approached the place, they saw the sacrificial materials, bark garments- 
and deer-skins spread out to dry and they knew it was a colony of 
holy men. 

The place was beautiful to look at. Birds and animals moved 
about with the freedom from fear bom of affectionate familiarity with* 
their human neighbours. Ripe fruits hung from the trees. The beauti¬ 
ful sound of Vedic chanting was heard. 

As they came near, they saw the radiant faces of the rishis. They 
welcomed Raama. “O, King! you are our protector,” they said. 
“Whether we are in the town or in the forest, you are our king.” And 
they gave the new-comers all they needed and a place in which to rest.. 

The following morning, the three took leave of the rishis and re¬ 
entered the forest, which was now denser than before and there were* 
tigers and Other wild animals. They proceeded slowly and cautiously. 

Suddenly, a gigantic form distorted like a broken fragment of a 
hill rushed at them making a blood-curdling noise. It was a man- 
eating Raakshasa and his roar was like thunder. He was unutterably 
ugly and the tiger-skin he wore was covered with blood and gobbets- 
of flesh of the slaughtered beast were sticking to it still. The corpses. 




122 


RAAMAAYANA 


•of three lions and the head of an elephant recently slain were impaled 
and strung in a row on the great spear which he shook menacingly 
at them. 

The Raakshasa lifted his weapon, roared horribly and, springing 
forward, lifted Seeta and as he held her, shouted at the princes: “Who 
are you, little fellows ? How dare you enter this forest ? You look 
young but wear matted locks and bark garments. You have dis¬ 
guised yourselves as ascetics; yet you carry bows and arrows, and go 
about with this woman by your side. Whom are you tying to cheat ? 
Are you not ashamed of yourselves? You are besmirching the good 
name of the r is his by your conduct, you hypocrites! Know that I 
am Viraadha himself. The flesh of rishis is my daily food. I shall 
have this lovely damsel for my wife, do you understand ? I shall now 
drink your blood, you villains!” 

Held in his grasp, Seeta trembled with fear. Raama lost his usual 
self-control and said: “Lakshmana, this is unbearable. Kaikeyi 
must have known all this when she sent us to the forest!” 

Raama was bewildered and did not know how to meet the Raa¬ 
kshasa. But Lakshmana, hissing like an angry snake said: “Raama, 
you are strong like Indra and, with me by your side, you should not 
talk dejectedly. Look at what my bow and arrow can do. The 
earth will presently drink this monster’s blood. My wrath which 
was denied outlet at Ayodhya, I shall now direct on this monster, and 
•shatter him as Indra did the winged mountains of yore. I shall attack 
this creature and slay him.” 

Viraadha roared again: “Who are you? Tell me at once.” 
Raama’s mind now cleared. His face glowed with courage and calmly 
he said: “We are princes of the Ikshvaaku race. We have come to 
live in the forest. May we know who you are ?” 

The Raakshasa answered: “And so, you are the sons of Dasa- 
ratha, are you? My father’s name is Jaya. And I am known among 
Raakshasas as Viraadha. You puny Kshatriyas, carrying arms, what 
can you and your ridiculous weapons do to me? I have secured a 
boon from Brahma that no weapon can hurt me. Leave this girl 
here and run away, if you wish to save your lives.” 

Raama’s eyes grew red with anger. “It is time for you to go to 
Yama,” he said and bent his bow and shot a sharp arrow at the mon¬ 
ster. It pierced his body and emerged red with blood, glistening like 
Are, and fell on the earth beyond. But the Raakshasa was not killed. 
Enraged by the pain, he placed Seeta on the ground and, lifting his 
spear and opening his mouth wide, rushed towards Raama and Laksh¬ 
mana. The princes sent a shower of arrows at him. The arrows 
stuck so thick on his body that he bristled all over like a gigantic 



VIKAADHA’S END 


123 


porcupine. The Raakshasa however laughed and shook his limbs, 
and down fell all the darts. He straightened himself and lifted his 
spear again. Raama and Lakshmana with two arrows broke the 
spear and rushed at him sword in hand. But he lifted them both up 
with his hands and put them on his shoulders and strode off into the 
forest. Seeta saw them disappear in the darkness of the jungle and 
wept aloud. 

Raama and Lakshmana, seated one on each shoulder, knowing 
that weapons could not kill him, wrenched off his arms and threw 
them down. They then attacked him with their hands and feet. Still 
they could not kill him on account of Brahma’s boon, but the agony 
of his wounds was so great that he howled with it. Unfortunately for 
him he had asked for immunity from slaughter, but not from pain. 

The brothers threw down the exhausted monster and Raama 
planted his foot on his neck to prevent him from rising. 

The touch of Raama’s feet cleared the mist in which the curse 
incurred in a previous birth had shrouded his understanding, and in 
the sudden light of recollection he joined his hands and said humbly: 
“Your feet have touched me, Lord, and my eyes are opened. I have 
realised who you are. I am under a curse, but you can save me. 1 
am not a Raakshasa by birth, but a Gandharva. 

“The boon I secured prevents my liberation. If you could some¬ 
how kill me, I shall recover my original form and go to heaven.” 

Accordingly Raama and Lakshmana smashed him without wea¬ 
pons and buried him in a pit they dug in the earth. And the Raakshasa 
returned to the world of Gandharvas. 

Then the Princes went back to the place where Seeta stood ter¬ 
rified and told her all that happened. 

They proceeded to the aashrama of Sarabhanga. Indra was there 
with other gods, talking to the rishi. Knowing that Raama had 
arrived, he cut short his talk and went away. Then Raama, with his 
brother and wife, approached the rishi and humbly saluted him. 

The old ascetic said: “It is for you I have been waiting. It is time 
for me to leave the body but my wish was to see you first. And so 
I have been waiting. Now my desire is fulfilled, I pass on to you all 
the merit of my penances.” 

Raama answered: “My Lord, should I not earn my own merit ? 
How can I receive what you have earned ? I have renounced every¬ 
thing to live in the forest. Advise me where I can best find an abode 
in the forest and send me forth with your blessing.” 

The rishi knew the secret of Raama’s avataar and told him: 
“Learn from the sage Suteekshna where in the forest you should 
dwell.” 



124 


RAAMAAYANA 


Then Sarabhanga kindled a fire and entered it. The gross body 
perished in the flames and a youthful ethereal form rose from the 
pyre and floated up the heavens. 

When the rishis of that forest heard the news of Viraadha’s death* 
they came to Raama and surrounded him. “It is our good fortune, 
O King,” they said: “that you have come to dwell in this region. 
Hereafter, we shall perform our penance untroubled by Raakshasa . 
Look at those bones scattered all round. They are the remains of 
ascetics killed and eaten by the Raakshasas. The rishis on the banks 
of Pampa and Mandaakini live in constant fear of their lives from 
these man-eating monsters. 

“The King’s duty from which he may not fail without sin is to 
protect his subjects. Just as householders pay taxes, a share of the 
merit of our penances goes to the King’s benefit. You are radiant 
like Indra, king of the gods. Protect us from this persecution of the 
Raakshasas . You are our only refuge.” 

Raama answered: “I am bound, O great ones, to obey your com¬ 
mand. I gave up kingship and came to the forest in obedience to 
my father’s wish. If in discharging my duty as a son I can also serve 
you and do some good, I shall count myself twice blessed. 

“I shall stay in the forest and destroy the Raakshasas and free 
you from trouble. Shed your fear.” 

Raama’s promise of help gave relief and joy to the rishis. Raama, 
Lakshmana and Seeta then proceeded towards the aashrama of 
’Suteekshna. They came to a big hill surrounded by a thick forest 
which they entered. There they saw bark garments drying in the sun 
and a little later came upon the old rishi himself. 

Saluting him, the Prince said: “My name is Raama, O holy 
sage. I have come to have darshan of you. I pray for your blessing.” 

The sage rose and embraced him. “Welcome, defender of 
. dharma . My aashrama is lit up by your presence. It is now yours. 
When I heard you had left Ayodhya and taken up your abode at 
'Chitrakoota, I knew you would come here, and have lived in hopes 
of seeing you. Else I would have long ago given up this body. 

“The merit I have accumulated I now pass on to you. Take it 
for yourself, your brother and the princess.” The sage’s face was 
bright with the light of long holy life. 

It was the custom of the rishis thus to offer their acquired merit 
to those who came as their guests. From Raama’s answer, we can 
see how such courtesies were to be received. 

“O sage, I must earn merit by my own good deeds. With your 
blessing, I still hope to do so. I wish to dwell in the forest The 
rsage Sarabhanga directed me here to receive your blessing and seek 



TEN YEARS PASS 


125 


your instructions as to where I could build a home for the rest of my 
stay in the forest.” 

The rishi's face was bright with joy and he said meaningfully: 
“You may live in this aashrama . There are many risk is living round 
about. The forest is full of fruit and roots. But evil beasts are abroad 
molesting the rishis and obstructing their penance. The sages are 
unable to bear this trouble. But for this, the place is good.” 

The Prince understood what the sage meant to convey. He bent 
and strung his bow and said: “Holy sage! I shall destroy these evil¬ 
doers. My bow is strong and sharp are my arrows. It is not proper 
that we should dwell in this aashrama . It may interrupt your penance. 
We shall find a place for ourselves in the neighbourhood. Permit us 
to do so.” 

That night they stayed in the sage’s aashrama as his guests. The 
following morning, the three got up and bathed in the cool water 
fragrant with flowers, lit the sacrificial fire, performed their worship 
and touched the feet of the sage. 

“By your grace, we spent a good night. We desire to see the 
other rishis in the region and receive their blessings. It is good to, set 
out before the sun grows hot. Pray, give us leave to go.” 

The sage embraced the princes and blessed them, saying: “Visit 
the good rishis in the Dandaka forest. They have all gone through 
great austerities and obtained divine powers. The forest is indeed 
beautiful with deer and birds and lotus-filled tanks, and the hills with 
cascades and peacocks. Lakshmana, go now with your brother and 
with Seeta. Come to this aashrama whenever you feel like it.” 

The three walked round the sage according to custom and took 
leave of him. Seeta handed to them their swords, bows and quivers 
and the princes set out, more radiant than before because of the great 
sage’s blessings. 


CHAPTER XXX 

TEN YEARS PASS 

Now begins the Aaranya Kaanda. The poet begins with an episode 
that prepares us for the misfortunes of Seeta. A new responsibility 
has been cast on the Prince. He is to destroy Raakshasas who molest 
the rishis in the Dandaka forest. A fear arose in Seeta’s heart like a 
shadow cast by events to come. 

M Why should you and Lakshmana who are properly to be merely 
ascetics iii the forest,” asked Seeta of her beloved husband, “take on 



126 


RAAMAAYANA 


yourselves this task of protection? You have come here to fulfil a 
promise of the late King. The duty of protecting the rishis belongs 
to the ruler who is actually reigning. It is not for you, engaged in 
penance, to protect rishis . To kill anyone, except in self-defence, is 
opposed to the vows of ascetic life. But you have rashly promised 
protection to the rishis . I wonder where this will lead us.” 

Thus Seeta argued in soft and affectionate words while they were 
going from Sage Suteekshna’s aashrama towards some other aashrama 
in the Dandaka forest. 

“Bear with me, my lord,” she said: “for seeming to counsel you. 
1 speak but as a weak woman out of my infinite love for you. You 
know what dharma is. But, men, it is said, are driven by desire into 
three kinds of sin: falsehood, lust and violence. Falsehood is un¬ 
thinkable in one who for truth’s sake has renounced a kingdom and 
is here in the forest. And as for lust, do I not know that you will not 
allow even the thought of another woman to enter your mind? But 
I am afraid of the third kind of sin. Should we kill one who does not 
attack us? Whether it is a Raakshasa or anyone else, why should we 
kill anyone who leaves us alone? You were in a hurry, I feel, to give 
your word to the rishis . To destroy the wicked is no doubt the duty 
of a Kshatriya, but can that duty still cling to you when you have re¬ 
nounced the privileges that go with it, and elected the life of a recluse 
in the forest? 

“The duties of kingship go with actual status. Dressed in gar¬ 
ments of bark and with hair matted, you are now an ascetic, pure and 
simple. Of course, you know best. I am only asking you to think 
well before undertaking anything.” 

Raama’s love and admiration of Seeta rose all the more for her 
misgivings. “Indeed, my love,” he said, “you speak like a true daughter 
of Janaka. But, Seeta, did you not once say yourself that the weapons 
borne by Kshatriyas are for protecting others? When helpless people 
suffer persecution, how could a Kshatriya sit still? When we came 
here, the sages complained of their sufferings and entreated our pro¬ 
tection. They could not endure the cruelties of the Raakshasas who 
looked on them as so much meat, and made shambles of the hermitages. 
Did they not show us a great heap of bones to show what had been 
done? ‘You are the king’s son,’ they said. ‘Our troubles will How 
end as darkness before the rising sun. You are our only refuge.’ 
Could we princes hear their piteous appeal and refrain from helping 
them? Every Kshatriya, every one has to do his duty, not the king 
alone. You are, of course solicitous for my safety. Even granting 
that what you say is right, I have given my word ana I cannot go back. 
They said, ‘You are our refuge’, and I have given my word to protect 



TBN YEARS PASS 


127 


them. A pledge thus given cannot be withdrawn. What I have 
spoken cannot now be unsaid. You and I must tread together the 
path of dharma. How can we differ?” Talking thus, they went 
along the forest path. 

This conversation occurs in the poem like the cloud that precedes 
the storm. It is the artistic creation of a changing atmosphere and 
not a random casting up of facile verses. 

For ten years, Raama, Lakshmana and Seeta lived quietly among 
the rishis. In the great Dandaka forest, there were a number of 
aashramas where the rishis lived practising their austerities and living 
their lives of abnegation. The princes spent a month in one aashrama, 
three months in a second and perhaps a year in a third as welcome 
and happy visitors. 

The forest was indescribably beautiful, with deer and bison, boars 
and elephants. The birds, the trees, the creepers, the blue water- 
lilies—all live again in the beauty of Vaalmeeki’s poetry. 

Raama was very happy these ten years, the joy of association 
with great and holy men being added to his joy in the quiet com¬ 
panionship of Lakshmana and Seeta. These ten years are disposed 
of in a small chapter. Time happily spent seems short and needs no 
length in recording. 

When after ten years had thus passed, the end of their forest life 
was approaching, Raama wished to have darshan of the sage, Agastya, 
who lived in the south. This sage was, like Viswaamitra, famous 
‘through the three worlds’. It used to be said that if all the wisdom 
and spiritual merit between the Himaalayas and the Vindhyas were 
put on one scale and Agastya sat on the other, the southern scale would 
go down by his weight. 

There is also the story of Agastya’s service during the wedding 
of Siva and Paarvati. All the rishis had gone to Mount Kailas for 
the great event; Agastya alone, staying in the south, maintained the 
balance of the earth. 

Once the Vindhya mountain steadily grew towards the heavens 
and threatened to obstruct the sun’s passage between the northern 
and southern hemispheres. The gods grew frightened and approached 
Agastya for help. The Sage stood before the mountain which bent 
low in reverence before him. Then Le blessed it saying, “May you 
ever remain thus”, and so the mountain stretches low and long even 
now. So goes the story. 

Two Raakshasas, Vaataapi and Ilvala, gave much trouble to the 
rishis. The former had obtained a boon that no matter into how many 
pieces his body was cut up, they would all reunite and his body would 
be whole and strong as before. Ilvala, disguised as a Braahmana, 



128 


RAAMAAYANA 


would go to the aashrama of one rishi after another and say, “O 
Learned One! Go over to my humble home and oblige me by accepting 
the consecrated food prepared for my manes.” 

On no account, according to ancient rule, could one refuse such 
an invitation. The rishis therefore had to accept the invitation. To 
them Ilvala served as food his brother Vaataapi cut up and cooked 
lusciously and after the unsuspecting guests had eaten the meat, the 
host would, according to custom, ask the guests, “Are you satisfied?” 
The answer would be, “Yes. We are content.” Then, Ilvala would 
shout, “Vaataapi! Come out!” And at the call of Ilvala, Vaataapi 
reunited into life would come out tearing the bowels of the guests. 
Many rishis had to die in this way. 

One day, Ilvala tried to play this trick on Agastya. As usual, 
Vaataapi entered Agastya’s entrails as meat. Agastya of course 
knew this, but he was a devotee of Ganapati and had obtained the 
power to digest the Raakshasa. 

“Are you satisfied?” asked Ilvala. 

“Yes, I am satisfied,” answered Agastya. 

Ilvala shouted, “Vaataapi, come out.” 

Agastya, laughing, said: “Vaataapi has been digested, my host!” 

“What?” cried Ilvala. “Have you killed my brother?” And 
he rushed against Agastya. 

The sage opened his eyes in indignation and the Raakshasa was 
reduced to ashes. No Raakshasas would thereafter come near Aga¬ 
stya and he protected the other sages also. 

Raama first went to the aashrama of Agastya’s younger brother 
and obtained his blessings before visiting Agastya himself. Pro¬ 
ceeding south and approaching Agastya’s place, Raama noticed the 
brightness of the whole region, the birds and animals playing about 
without fear and Braahmanas gathering flowers for worship. 

He told Lakshmana to go in advance and announce him to the 
sage. Lakshmana met one of the disciples of the sage and sent word 
through him: “Raamachandra, son of Dasaratha, has come with 
his brother and wife to seek the great sage’s blessings.” 

Agastya warmly welcomed the princes. He said: “I heard of 
your having come to dwell in Chitrakoota and I was looking forward 
to your visit. The end of your exile is approaching. Stay here during 
what remains of it in peace. This place is free from the fear of Raa¬ 
kshasas. 

Raama answered: “I am happy to receive your blessing and I 
thank you for your gracious welcome. But I have promised pro¬ 
tection to the rishis in Dandaka and now that I have received your 
blessings, I must return to that forest.” 



THE SOORPANAKHA EPISODE 


129 


And Agastya answered: “What you say is right.” Then the 
sage gave to Raama the bow made by Visvakarma for Vishnu and 
an inexhaustible quiver, as well as a sword. He blessed him saying, 
“Raama, destroy the Raakshasas with these weapons which of yore 
Vishnu gave me.” 

Agastya advised the prince to spend the rest of his exile at 
Panchavati. 

“May God bless you, O, Prince,” said Agastya, “take good care 
of Seeta who for love of you cheerfully submits to hardships to which 
she was not born or accustomed. Women are by nature fond of 
comfort and averse to hardship, but no such weakness is found in 
Sseta. She is like Arundhati. Wherever you are, Raamachandra, with 
Likshmana and Seeta by your side, the place will be filled with beauty. 
But Panchavati is itself a beautiful spot and Seeta will love to live there, 
secure in the protection of you both. Fruit and roots are there in 
abundance. Stay there on the bank of the Gcdoavari. The period 
of your exile is coming to an end. You will soon fulfil your father’s 
plighted word. Like Yayaati, Dasaratha is served by his eldest son.” 


CHAPTER XXXI 

THE SOORPANAKHA EPISODE 

The Princes and Seeta, following Agastya’s instruction, took the 
way to Panchavati. 

On the way they met a huge figure perched on a big tree. They 
took it to be a Raakshasa. 

“ Who are you ?” asked Raama in an angry tone. The vulture 
however answered in a voice full of mildness and affection : “ My 
child, I am your father’s aged friend.” Then he proceeded to tell 
his story. 

Jataayu was the brother of Sampaati, the son of Aruna the dawn- 
god, who was brother to Garuda the great Eagle-vehicle of Vishnu. 

He said : “ When you leave Seeta alone and go hunting in the 
forest, I shall be looking after her safety.” 

The Prince was pleased and accepted the offer of the bird with 
gratitude. They then proceeded on their journey. 

Raama was thrilled by the beauty of Panchavati and gratefully 
offered praise in his thoughts to Agastya for recommending the spot 
tO'thetiL He told Lakshmana : “ We can build our aashrama and 
enjoy our stay here for any length of time. Those hills are near and 
yet too near. Look at those herds of deer. The trees with their 

1U4. 



130 


RAAMAAYANA 


flowers and the sweetly singing birds, the river, the dean sand— 
everything is beautiful. Choose for us a good site and build a cottage. M 

Lakshmana did as he was told. He constructed an aashrama. 

Vaalmeeki pauses here to explain the skill and swiftness of 
Lakshmana’s workmanship. He describes in detail how the mud 
walls were raised and the thatched roof was made. Raama admires 
Lakshmana enthusiastically. 1 

“ You are more than a father to me,” said the Prince shedding 
tears of love and joy. 

We, too, may pause to think how the noble prince Lakshmana 
acquired this skill. We may infer that in those days education even 
of princes included a knowledge of the realities of life and develop¬ 
ment of manual skill such as could enable one to collect materials 
in a forest and put a neat cottage for oneself. 

In the aashrama at Panchavati, Raama and Seeta lived happily, 
lovingly served by Lakshmana. 

One morning in early winter the three went as usual to the 
Godaavari for their bath and to offer their morning prayers and 
fetch water for the day’s needs. They walked conversing about 
the beauty of the season. Lakshmana thought of Bharata and how 
he would then be busy performing the ceremonies appropriate to the 
month. 

He said : “ Bharata is entitled to live in ease but he has taken 
on himself a life of hardship because we live a life of hardship in the 
forest. My heart is full of sorrow for him. Even in this cold weather 
poor Bharata no doubt eats sparingly and sleeps on the bare floor. 
This cold morning he too is probably walking towards the Sarayu. 
How fortunate we are to have such a noble brother ! Pure in mind 
and speech and conduct, renouncing all pleasures, he lives a life of 
austerity for our sake. He is exactly like our dear father and ^uite 
the opposite of his mother. How could so cruel a woman as Kaikeyi 
bear so good a son ?” 

Raama stopped him, saying, “ Talk as much as you like of 
Bharata and our father, but stop condemning Kaikeyi. All that 
you say of Bharata is true and my thoughts too today go to him in 
love. How long yet to see him again 1 When shall we have that 
pleasure, Lakshmana? When shall we four brothers live together 
again ? Bharata’s loving words are still sweetly ringing in my ear.” 

Thus thinking longingly of home and Bharata they bathed in 
the Godaavari on that early winter morning. 

After offering c^lations to their ancestors and 
sun, Raama rose transfigured like the Lord Siva and returned tfcibe 
aashrama with Seeta and Lakshmana. 



THE SOORPANAKHA EPISODE 


131 


Their morning duties over, they sat whiling the hours with wistful 
talk of old days and tales of long ago. 

While they were thus recapturing the past in sweet companion¬ 
ship suddenly there came a Raakshasa woman and saw them. She 
was Soorpanakha, Raavana’s sister who was roaming the forest full 
of the idle thoughts of well-fed ill-taught youth. She was horribly 
ugly, but had the magic power to assume any lovely form at will. 
When she saw the godlike beauty of Raama, she was filled with un¬ 
controllable desire for him and accosted him. 

‘‘ Who are you, dressed like an ascetic but accompanied by a 
woman and carrying warlike weapons and arrow ? Why are you 
here in the forest that belongs to the Raakshasas ? Speak the truth.” 

On such occasions it was the courtesy of those days for the 
person accosted to announce himself and recite his name, city and 
history and enquire of the new-comer concerning his or her family 
and the purpose of the visit. 

Raama began: “ I am the eldest son of the great King Dasaratha. 
My name is Raama. This is my brother Lakshmana. And this, 
my wife Seeta. Obeying the behests of my father and mother and 
in fulfilment of dharma , I am now in the forest. And now please 
announce who you are. What is your family ? You look like a 
woman of the Raakshasa race. What is your purpose in coming 
here?” 

She answered: “Have you heard of Raavana, the heroic son 
of Visravas and the king of the Raakshasas ? I am his sister. My 
name is Soorpanakha. My brothers Kumbhakarna and Vibheeshana 
are also renowned warriors. The lords of this region, Khara and 
Dooshana, are also my brothers. They too are mighty men-at-arms 
and wield great authority in these regions. But I am not subject to 
their control, but am a free person—free to do what I like and please 
myself. Everybody in this forest is, as a matter of fact, afraid of me. 
She said this to strengthen her wooing position. 

“ The moment I set eyes on you,” she continued, “ I fell in love 
with you. You are now my husband. Why do you wander around 
with this midget of a woman ? I am the mate worthy of you. 
Come with me. Let us wander at will through the forest. I can 
take what shape I please. Do not mind this girl of yours. I shall 
eat her up in a trice and dispose of her. Do not hesitate.” 

Under the influence of lust, she thought in the manner of her 
race and prated thus. 

Ajtt this amazed and amused Raama. He smiled and said; 
“ Oh beautiful one l Your desire for me will end in trouble for 
you. My wife is here with me. I do not care to live the life of a 



132 


RAAMAA YANA 


man with two wives. But my hefty brother here is untrammelled 
with a wife, and is as good-looking as myself. He is the proper 
husband for you. Offer your hand to him and leave me alone.** 

Raama said this, being confident that Lakshmana would deal 
with Soorpanakha suitably. 

The Raakshasi took Raama’s advice seriously and approached 
Lakshmana saying, “ Oh, my hero, come with me. Let us together 
wander at will in joy through this Dandaka forest.” 

Lakshmana entered into the humour of the situation and said: 
“ Do not be foolish. He is trying to cheat you. What is your status 
and what is mine ? l am here a slave to my brother, while you are a 
princess. How could you become my wife and accept the position 
of a slave’s slave ? Insist on Raama’s taking you as his second wife. 
Do not mind Seeta. Soon Raama will prefer you to her and you 
will be happy with him.” 

Some critic might ask whether it was proper thus to torment 
a woman, especially a woman in love. But if we exercise our ima¬ 
gination and have before us a monster of uglinesss we can understand 
the situation. It is true that she could assume a charming form she 
chose, but in the intoxication of lust, she seems to have omitted even 
this allurement. 

44 This ugly, corpulent and paunchy Raakshasi , with leering eyes 
blood-shot with lust, her red hair all dishevelled and her voice hoarse 
with passion, accosted the handsome, beautifully built and smiling 
Raama,” says Vaalmeeki., The Tamil poet Kamban varies the 
situation by making Soorpanakha assume a lovely shape from'the 
outset. 

Impelled by brute passion, the Raakshasi did as she was told 
by Lakshmana and went agai i to Raama. She thought and acted 
like a Raakshasi for she knew no other way of life. - r&i?" 

The sight of Seeta enraged her. 44 It £ this wretched little insect 
that stands between you and me. How could you love this girl 
without a waist ? Look. I shall finish her off this instant. I cannot 
live without you. Once I have put her out of the way, you and I shall 
live together happily.” Saying this, she sprang on Seeta. 

Raama intervened just in time to save Seeta. The farce had 
gone too far and threatened to become a tragedy. Raama shouted 
to Lakshmana: “ Look, I have just been able to save Seeta. Attend 
to this monster and teach her a lesson.” 

Lakshmana at once took up his sword and maimed Soorpanakha 7 
and drove her out. Disgraced and mutilated, Soorpanakha uttered 
a loud wail and disappeared into the forest. 

Bleeding and mad with pain and rage, she flung herself on the 



THE SOORPANAKHA EPISODE 


133 


ground before Khara, as he sat in state with his colleagues. Yelling 
with anguish, she related the story of her wrongs. The scorn and 
mutilation she had suffered was an insult to the Raakshasa race which 
only blood could efface. 

She said : “ Look at me. Raama and Lakshmana have done 
this and they are still alive and roaming in your domain. And you 
sit here doing nothing.” 

Khara stood up and said : “ My dear sister, what is all this ? 
I understand nothing. Calm yourself and tell me what has happened. 
Who dared do this thing to you and is he in this forest? Who is 
he that wants to become food for crows and vultures ? Who has 
stirred up the black cobra ? Who is that fool ? Where is he ? Tell 
me, and he shall die at once. The earth is thirsty for his blood. 
Stand up and tell me everything as it happened.” 

44 Two handsome young men,” said Soorpanakha, 44 have come 
into the forest, dressed like ascetics and accompanied by a girl. They 
say they are the sons of Dasaratha. These two together, making an 
excuse of the girl, attacked me and have hurt me thus shamefully. 
I am thirsting for the blood of these villains. Slay them first. Every¬ 
thing else can vait.” 

Khara ordered his generals: 44 Go at once, slay these men and 
bring their lifeless bodies. Drag hither the woman also. Delay not.” 

Fourteen generals set out to do his bidding.* 

In Kamban’s Raamaayana , Soorpanakha is delineated as having 
come in the shape of a beautiful young woman, entirely human, 
who tried to tempt Raama. Kamban departs widely from Vaal- 
meeki in this episode and he makes a beautiful episode of it as will 
be seen in the next chapter. 


* There are some people who pose as critics of our holy books and 
traditions saying, “This hero killed a w^man. He insulted and injured a 
woman who offered him her love. He killed Vaali from behind, rather than 
face him and accept honourable defeat. He unjustly banished tieeta to the 
forest at the end of all the adventures. If t banishment of Seeta was not 
unjust and if he rightly suspected Seeta’s fidelity, why then, we too, must 
suspect her fidelity!” 

All such criticism is based on a mentality of hatred. We have un¬ 
fortunately plenty of barren, heartless cleverness, devoid of true under¬ 
standing. Let those who find faults in Raama see faults, and if these critics 
faultlessly pursue dharma and avoid in their own lives the flaws they 
discover in Raama, the bhaktas of Sri Raama will indeed welcome it with 
joy. If they exhibit the virtues of Raama and add to .these more virtues 
and greater {lawlessness, who can complain? 




CHAPTER XXXH 


KAMBAN’S SOORPANAKHA 

Raama and Lakshmana drove out Soorpanakha, as one takes a stick 
and drives out a donkey straying into a garden. Such is the brief 
and simple treatment of this incident by Vaalmeeki. 

Kamban, the Tamil poet, however, deals with it more elaborately 
and has made a number of changes in the story. 

Sitting on the river bank, Raama watched a swan walking and 
then looked at Seeta, also walking. Noting the similarity in the 
gait, Raama was pleased and smiled. Seeta, for her part, observed 
an elephant returning from the river and, reminded of Raama’s gait, 
smiled. 

Thus in Panchavati, beside the river Godaavari, love flowed 
smoothly between the banks of dharma. Just then Fate conspired 
with Lust to drag Soorpanakha to the presence of Raama. 

The Lord Vishnu had left the Ocean of Milk and taken birth 
as Dasaratha’s son, to rid the earth of the enemies of the gods. But 
how was Soorpanakha to know this ? 

Beholding the beauty of his person, she wondered : “ Is this 
Manmatha or Indra or Siva or Vishnu? But Manmatha has no 
body. Indra has a thousand eyes and Siva has a third eye in the 
forehead, and Vishnu has four arms ; so he cannot be Indra, Siva 
or Vishnu. 

“Perhaps, after all, this is Manmatha who has recovered his 
body through penance, after it had been reduced to ashes by Siva’s 
wrath. 

“If it be Manmatha, why should this handsome hero still perform 
penance? Why should this lotus-eyed youth waste his time in 
tapas ?” 

So sh$ stood there wondering, watching, unable to turn her eyes 
away. She thought: “ My own form would fill him with disgust. 

I shall change my appearance and then approach him.” 

She transformed herself into a beautiful young woman and 
appeared before him like the full moon. Her slender frame was 
like a golden creeper climbing up the Kalpaka tree in Heaven. 
Her lovely lips and teeth were matched by her fawn-like eyes. 

Her gait was that of a peacock. Her anklets made music as 
she came near. Raama looked up and his eyes beheld this creature 
of ravishing beauty. She bowed low and touched his feet. Then 
she withdrew a little with modesty shading her eyes. 

Raama welcomed her, imagining that she was a visitor from 



kamban’s soorpanakha 


135 


some distant place and enquired: "Which is your place? What is 
your name? Who are your kinsfolk?" 

She answered: "I am the daughter of the grandson of Brahma. 
Kubera is a brother of mine. Another is Raavana, conqueror of 
Kailaasa. I am a maiden and my name is Kaamavalli.” 

"And what is your purpose in coming here?" 

"It is not proper for a woman to speak out the trouble in her 
mind. And yet I suppose I must speak it out. The God of Love 
has invaded my heart. You can and should save me." 

She paused. Raama remained silent. And she went on. 

"You may wed me with Gandharva rites. You know it is per¬ 
mitted for lovers to come together in this manner. Once we are 
joined in this way, not only will happiness be ours, but friendship 
between you and my brother, the great Raavana, will follow. You 
are alone in this forest and the Raakshasas will molest you. Even 
if you do not prvoke them, they will give you trouble because you 
are dressed as an ascetic. If you marry me, you will be free from 
all this danger. Not only that, my powerful people will be ready 
to serve you in all ways. Consider this well.” 

Thus she pleaded for the fulfilment of her desire, citing authority 
and appealing to Raama’s self-interest also. 

Raama laughed revealing his beautiful pearly teeth. Just then, 
Seeta was coming towards them through the plants and creepers, 
herself looking like another creeper. Soorpanakha saw and mar¬ 
velled at her loveliness. 

Not knowing who she was, Soorpanakha angered by lust, told 
Raama: "This girl is a Raakshasi in human form. She has come 
to deceive you. Beware of her. This is not her real form. She 
is a Raakshasi that eats raw meat. Throw her out. Have nothing 
to do with her." 

Raama laughed again. "You are indeed wise," said he. "You 
have found out the truth about her.” 

Meanwhile, Seeta had come and stood by Raama. Soor¬ 
panakha could not understand what Raama was laughing for. In 
her lust, she had quite lost her wits. She hissed at Seeta : " Why do 
you approach this hero of mine, oh Raakshasn Go away from 
here." 

Seeta, bewildered and afraid, hung on the prince’s shoulder, 
and she then seemed like a lightning flash hugging a rain-bearing 
cloud* 

Raama now saw that the joke had gone too far and said : " Dear 
lady, please stop, lest my brother should hear you. He is quick¬ 
tempered and terrible when angry. I advise you to go back quickly 



136 


RAAMAAYANA 


the way you came.” Saying this, Raama took Seeta with him and 
went into the hermitage. 

The fire of her desire unquenched, the Raakshasi spent the night 
somewhere, somehow. In the morning, she thought : “ I shall 

die if I do not get this man. So long as this girl is with him, he will 
never come near me. I must contrive to carry her off and put her 
away somewhere and then I may secure his love.” Thus resolved, 
she came again to the aashrama. 

Raama had gone to the river for his morning ablutions and 
prayer and Seeta was alone in the aashrama . Soorpanakha reckoned 
this was her chance to carry her off. She did not notice that Laksh- 
mana was in the wood nearby. She rushed towards Seeta. Laksh- 
mana shouted and sprang on the Raakshasi. Catching hold of her 
hair, he kicked her and drew his sword. 

Soorpanakha when attacked resumed her own shape and attacked 
Lakshmana. Lakshmana easily caught hold of her and mutilated 
her and drove her off. 

Soorpanakha ran into the forest, bleeding and loudly appealing 
to her kinsfolk : “Oh, brother Khara ! Oh, brother Raavana ! 
Oh, Indrajit ! Oh, kings of the Raakshasa race ! Are you all 
asleep ? A mere man has insulted me and cut off my nose. Do 
you not hear my lamentations ?” Thus, at the top of her voice, the 
monster ran shouting. 

This is Kamban’s version of the episode. Soorpanakha approa¬ 
ches and tries to attract Raama, hiding her true form and appearing 
like a beautiful human girl. This variation is supported in a way by 
Vaalmeeki’s description of Soorpanakha as ‘Kaamaroopini*, that is, 
one able to assume what form she liked. 

The Tamil poet appears to have felt something wrong or wanting 
in the Vaalmeeki story and has woven an episode showing how bestial 
passion works. 


CHAPTER XXXin 

KHARA AND HIS ARMY LIQUIDATED 

Accompanied by the fourteen generals of Khara, Soorpanakha came 
back to Raama’s aashrama , determined to avenge herself and drink 
the blood of the princes. Pointing to the two young men, she told 
her escort: “ Low, there stand the men who insulted and mutilated 
me. Slay them immediately.” 

Raama understood the situation at once and told Lakshmima: 



KHARA AND HIS ARMY LIQUIDATED 


137 


Take care of Seeta for a while, while I deal with those fellows/’ 
Saying this, he took up his bow. 

Following the prevailing rules of war, Raama announced himself 
to Khara’s generals and said: “ Tell us the reason that you come here. 
Know that we are here in the forest at the bidding of the rishis for 
the purpose of destroying their enemies. If you wish to escape with 
life, leave us alone.” 

But the Raakshasas wanted not peace, but war. And the battle 
began. It did not take long for Raama’s arrows to annihilate the 
Raakshasa generals. 

Once again, lamenting loudly, Soorpanakha went to Khara. 
The destruction of the powerful detachment he had sent was incon¬ 
ceivable—he could not believe it. He sought to soothe his disturbed 
sister with soft words. 

“ I have sent warriors unconquerable, each one like Yama. 
They must have by now fulfilled their mission. Why do you weep ? 
Why need you bewail while I am here ?” 

Soorpanakha rose, and wiping the tears from her eyes, said : 
44 True, you sent your fourteen warriors with me. But the fourteen 
now lie stiff and cold in death, slain by Raama, whose skill with 
weapons baffles description. If you have a spark of pride in you, 
start at once, fight with Raama and save the Raakshasa race. If 
you do not, the destruction of our people is certain. But if you are 
afraid, tell me so and I shall understand. These young men who have 
entered your satrapy are determined to destroy your race, unless you 
first meet and destroy them.” 

These words, spoken by his sister in a loud voice before all his 
courtiers, pierced Khara’s heart. 

44 Why do you speak thus terrified by a puny human being ? 
Hold yourself in patience for a moment and you will have his blood 
to drink.” So saying, Khara rose. 

“ Do not go alone !” she said. “ Take your army with you.” 

Khara gave orders accordingly. A great army, fully armed, 
went in advance under the leadership of Dooshana. Behind the 
army Khara proceeded majestically in a chariot. On the way he 
met with many bad omens which affected the spirits of his host. He 
laughed and reassured his army, saying : 

44 Never have I been so far defeated in battle. Do not mind 
these portents. We shall soon crush these two little men and return 
in triumph.” 

The army took heart at these bold words of their leader. 

Hearing the tumultuous noise of the approaching army, Raama 
and La k s hm ana prepared for battle. Raama told Lakshmana : 



138 


RAAMAAYANA 


“ Do you see the signs ? It is certain that the Raakshasas of Japa- 
sthaana are coming here to their death I I see in your face the glory 
of the victory that awaits us. Arm yourself and take Seeta with 
you to a cave in the hill and look after her. I shall encounter the 
Raakshasa hordes and destroy them. Go at once. I do not require 
any help.” Saying this, Raama put on his armour and strung his 
bow. 

Lakshmana did as Raama bade and took Seeta to a mountain 
cave. 

A great battle was to follow. So the Devas and Gandharvas 
hovered in the heavens to watch the fight. They uttered benedictions 
and prayed for Raama’s victory. The rishis had misgivings. How 
was Raama, standing single, to meet and quell this huge army ? 
As Raama stood there, bow in hand, the radiance of his face was 
like that of Rudra himself when he bent Pinaaka his great bow. 

The Raakshasa force advanced in proud array, with drums and 
trumpets and the clanking pageantry of war filling the quarters with 
clamour and causing the denizens of the forest to stampede in all 
directions. Raama stood holding his bow with his hand on the string. 
Like great black clouds disturbing the sun the Raakshasa hordes 
surrounded him. 

The battle began ; but while even the Devas wondered how he 
could withstand the yelling masses which rushed on him, a constant 
stream of deadly arrows sped from his bow before which the Raakshasa 
ranks withered and fell like moths before a blazing fire. 

Dooshana himself now stood in front of Raama. Raama bent 
his bow and sent his shafts in all directions in an unceasing stream. 
Like rays from the sun, and with the speed of light, arrows shot 
out from the spot where Raama stood, spread out in all directions 
and brought down warriors, chariots, elephants and horses* 

The shafts pierced the bodies of the Raakshasas and came out, 
covered with their blood shining like fire. The army was utterly 
destroyed and Raama stood still, like Siva at the end of Time. 

Dooshana came again with another great army. For a while 
he seemed indomitable. But soon Raama’s arrows laid low his 
chariot, drivers and horses. He jumped down and sprang ^towards 
Raama. Raama’s arrows, however, severed his arms from his 
trunk. And the monster fell dead on the ground like a huge elephant. 
Other Raakshasas, who saw Dooshana falling, rushed against Raama 
and were also slain by the arrows that sped from his Kodanda. 

In this way f the whole army of Khara was destroyed. It had 
come roaring like an ocean and now it lay still, a mass of corpses 
and evened limbs and derelict weapons and broken chariots* t 



KHARA AND HIS ARMY LIQUIDATED 


139 


Only Khara and Trisiras remained. As Khara rushed forward 
to meet Raama, Trisiras stopped him saying : “ I shall go first and 
kill Raama. Or else, I shall be killed. After I am dead, you may 
meet him.” 

The three-headed Raakshasa mounted on his chariot attacked 
Raama with his arrows. Raama met them with arrows that hissed 
like deadly serpents. At last Trisiras collapsed and fell spitting blood. 
His followers fled like deer. 

Khara, seeing this, cried “ Hold ” to the fugitives and directed 
his chariot against Raama. His confident pride was gone but he 
fought manfully. The shafts sent by the two warriors covered the 
sky. Khara stood like Yama in his chariot, sending his stream of 
arrows. For an instant, Raama leaned on his bow. In that interval 
Raama’s armour was pierced by Khara’s arrows and showed the 
Prince’s body shining like the sun. 

Raama now took up the bow of Vishnu and laid low Khara’s 
chariot and cut his bow in twain, Khara then took his mace and 
approached Raama. The Devas and rishis watching the battle 
became anxious and renewed their benedictions. 

“ You have been a terror and a plague to mankind !” exclaimed 
Raama. “ Strength of body is no protection to an evil-doer. You 
have persecuted and killed rishis engaged in penance in the forest. 
You will now receive the punishment due for these sins of yours. 
The spirits of the rishis whose flesh you fed on are now witnessing 
your punishment from their aerial chariots. I have come to the 
Dandaka forest to destroy wicked Raakshasas. My arrows will 
^pierce the bodies of all your kinsfolk. Your head will soon roll on 
the ground like a ripe fruit.” 

“Human worm!” exclaimed Khara. “Son of Dasaratha ! 
Have done with boasting ! You are proud because you have killed 
a few common Raakshasas . A hero boasts not as you do. Only a 
Kshatriya banished by his people can talk boasting like this. You 
have shown you can brag. Let us see now if you can fight I Your 
words have blazed up like burning straw with little heat or life. Here 
I stand, mace in hand, like Yania to take your life. Evening approa¬ 
ches. Be prepared to lose your life. I am here to avenge the death 
of these my followers whom you have killed.” 

So saying, he whirled his mace, and hurled it at Raama. The 
mace was split by Raama’s arrows into splinters which fell harmless 
bn the ground. 

“ Have you finished speaking, Raakshasa ? Now you shall die. 
This forest will be safe hereafter and the ishis will live in peace/* 
said Raama. 



140 


RAAMAAYANA 


Even while Raama was speaking, Khara pulled out by its roots 
a huge tree and, gnashing his teeth, threw it at Raama, but this too 
Raama split by his arrows. And, fearing further delay, he aimed 
deadly darts at Khara. The wounded Raakshasa sprang on Raama 
intending to close with him ; but the latter avoided contact by stepping 
back, and laid him dead with a shaft which clove his breast. 

The Devas showered flowers from on high and cried in joy : 

Raama has killed the sinful Raakshasa . Men can live in peace in 
the Dandaka forest hereafter. Within an hour Raama has destroyed 
Khara, Dooshana, Trisiras and their whole army. Indeed he is a 
hero.” 

Seeta and Lakshmana returned from the cave. Lakshmana 
embraced Raama and rejoiced that single-handed he had fulfilled 
the promise of safety he had given to the rishis. 

How did Raama all alone perform these feats ? If one observes 
a cow guarding her calf and scattering a whole crowd of men, one 
can realise the power of love. Love is a supreme quality which 
according to occasion manifests itself in diverse heroic forms—such 
as valour and self-sacrifice, just like gold which can be changed for 
silver or goods or other things of value. When God assumes human 
form and is engaged in fulfilling His promise to save the helpless. 
His limitless power comes into play. 


CHAPTER XXXIV 

THE PATH OF RUIN 

Akampana, one of the few Raakshasas who survived the great slaughter 
at Panchavati fled to Lanka and seeking audience of Raavana, said: 
“Almost all our people who occupied Janasthaana are dead and 
Janasthaana is now an empty ruin. I alone have managed to escape 
with life.” 

Raavana was furious with anger. He started and violently 
shouted: “ Who destroyed my lovely Janasthaana ? Was it Yama 
or Agni or Vishnu ? I shall deal death to the god of Death. I shall 
bum up both the god of fire and the Sun. I shall strangle and suffo¬ 
cate the god of wind. Tell me, who was it that destroyed Janasthaana 
and killed my men heedless that 1 am here to avenge ? Speak out 
at once.” 

It was ever dangerous to carry unpleasant news to tyrants. 
Akampana was frightened by the king’s rage and said: “I shall speak, 
if you give me protection.” He then told his tale: ~Raama, sou 



THE PATH OF RUIN 


141 


of Daaaiatha, a young warrior, lion-like in fierce valour, a hero who 
has already acquired fame among men fought with Khara and Doos- 
shana at Panchavati and destroyed them.” 

The Raakshasa king hissed like a cobra and said: “What are 
you talking ? How did this happen ? Did lndra and the divine 
hosts come down to earth and fight on Raama’s side ?” 

Akampana answered : “ No such thing happened, great king. 
Alone did Raama stand against our whole army and its commanders 
and destroyed them all, and Khara and Dooshana too were slain. 
The deadly arrows issuing from Raama’s bow like fiveheaded serpents 
pursued the Raakshasas wherever they went and destroyed them.” 
And he went on to describe at length Raama’s skill and speed in the 
use of his weapons. 

And so Raavana learnt that Dasaratha’s son, Raama, with his 
younger brother, Lakshmana was at Panchavati and that he, alone 
without even his brother’s aid, had done it all and that no gods had 
come to their aid. 

“ Well,” said Raavana, “ I do not understand this but I shall 
start at once. I shall destroy these little worms of men and return.” 
And he rose. 

“Hear me, great king, before you go,” said Akampana, and 
explained once again Raama’s strength and courage. 

“ Listen to me. No one can fight with Raama and conquer 
him. When I say 4 No one,’ I mean 4 No one.’ Not even you can 
do it. Because you have promised me protection, I dare thus to tell 
you the plain truth. There is only one way of killing him. His wife 
is with him. The whole earth holds not her equal in beauty. If you 
contrive to carry her off, separation from her will kill Raama ; so 
great is his love for her. Consider how you can do this. Do not 
think of battle with him.” 

When he heard of Seeta’s beauty, the Raakshasa's desire was 
kindled. He began to think that the defeat of Khara and his hosts 
was indeed a fortunate event that brought him an opportunity for 
gaining one more beautiful queen and wife. He welcomed Akam- 
pana’s advice and said: “ Tomorrow morning I shall go. I think 
your plan is good.” 

Accordingly Raavana set out in his mule-yoked flying chariot 
which gleamed like the moon among the clouds as it sped fast in the 
air. He went straight to Maareecha’s dwelling. 

Maareecha duly welcomed his king and enquired what urgent 
necessity brought him there. Raavana answered: 44 Hear me, 
Maareecha. You and you alone can help me. Janasthaana has 
been destroyed and so too the whole army I had stationed there. All 



142 


RAAMAAYANA 


this is the work of Raama, son of Dasaratha. Isn’t it amazing ? 
To avenge myself, I am resolved to carry off his wife. In this I need 
your advice and help.” 

Maareecha whose experience of Raama’s prowess had seared 
into his soul was horrified, and tried to dissuade Raavana from his 
mad enterprise. 

“ What plan is this ? Some enemy determined to destroy you, 
but pretending to be your friend, has given you this plan of carrying 
off Seeta. Whoever gave you this advice wishes the end of the 
Raakshasa race. It is like advising you to put your hand into the 
mouth of a sleeping cobra and pull out its fang. Haven’t you a 
happy home and devoted wives ? Return to them, and enjoy your 
life and prosperity. To hanker after Raama’s wife is the highway 
to disgrace and destruction and the annihilation of the Raakshasa 
race.” 

Ten-headed Raavana went back to Lanka, for Maareecha’s 
counsel appeared right to him. Raavana must have then remem¬ 
bered the omission in the series of boons he had secured. He had 
obtained immunity from the attacks of all beings except men. Raama’s 
shafts had conquered and killed the whole army with Khara, Trisiras, 
Dooshana and other mighty warriors. Thinking of all this, Raavana 
accepted Maareecha’s advice. 

But Fate would not let him be. Raavana was seated on his 
throne with his counsellors around him. Majesty shone on his face 
like a sacrificial flame fed with ghee and his mighty body showed the 
scars of many wounds received in victorious battles against gods, 
Asuras and others. His strength and courage were limitless—so was 
his adhartna . He had no equal in persecuting Devas, spoiling sacrifices 
and carrying away women. The hosts of Devas and Asuras were 
mortally afraid of him. He was a terror to all creatures. Enjoying 
wealth and varied pleasures, freed from the fear of death the ruler of 
Lanka knew no master or rival and feared neither God nor sin. 

With his ten heads, large eyes and huge limbs, his figure was 
terrible, but it also possessed the marks of royalty. Gorgeously 
dressed and bejewelled as he sat on his throne, surrounded by his 
ministers in the midst of the splendour of the despoiled world, there 
suddenly appeared before him like the vision of the doom to be, his 
sister Soorpanakha, bleeding and mutilated, a shape of pain and sorrow 
and shame. While all looked at her with horror-struck eyes in stunned 
silence, her anguish broke out in burning words. 

“ What a fool are you that, sunk in sensual pleasures and arm* 
gantly secure of sovereignty, you are not awake to the deadly danger 
that threatens your existence at your very doors ! Surely that king 



THE PATH OF RUIN 


143 


who is drunk with self-importance and dead to all portents that threaten 
his state is doomed to shame and destruction ! No object is of less 
account or more contemptible than a ruler who falls through his own 
remissness. Know you not that your brothers, Khara, Dooshana 
and Trisiras and your gallant army of fourteen thousand fierce Raak - 
shasas have been exterminated by Raama, a mere man, and that your 
outpost at Janasthaana has been destroyed ? One moment I saw a 
single warrior stand proud in the glittering pageantry of war and the 
next, they lay dead slain by that man’s arrows, strewing the ground 
like ripe crops devastated by a terrible hail-storm ; and you see me, 
your own sister, disgraced, mutilated and heart-broken ! Have you 
no thoughts of vengeance—you, a hero, a brother, king ?” 

, Stung by her contempt and heart-struck by her suffering and 
sorrow, Raavana said : “ Be sure you shall have vengeance. But 
this Raama—who is he ? What sort of man is he ? What are his 
weapons ? How does he fight ? What seeks he in Dandaka forest ? 
And how happened it that you were so cruelly mutilated ?” 

She gave a description of the brothers and Seeta, dwelling on 
the virile beauty and powers of the brothers—probably with a view 
tp provoke the envious jealousy of the Raakshasa —and growing 
enthusiastically eloquent about the superlative loveliness of Seeta. 

“I have no words to describe her perfections. I have never 
seen such sublime beauty in any created riling—be it Gandharva or 
kinnara or a daughter of man. And now, I will tell you why this 
ghastly outrage was perpetrated on me. On seeing this Seeta, I felt 
that none but you deserved her and that she was fully worthy to share 
your bed and out of my love for you, I tried to carry her off for you. 
L^kshmana, who was standing by, prevented it and, springing on me, 
disfigured and disgraced me thus. For your sake, all this I have 
suffered. If you wish to avenge this insult and protect the honour 
of the race, rise and go at once. 

44 Apart from revenge for the insult I have suffered, secure for 
yourself a wife worthy of you. If you capture her and disgrace Raama, 
the spirits of the warriors who were slain in Dandaka would be satis¬ 
fied* I too shall feel that some amends have been made for the 
dishonour done to me. 

44 You do not know your own strength. You can easily secure 
Seeta, and make her your own. And can you remain indifferent 
to the insult to your race ? Khara and Dooshana lie dead in Jana¬ 
sthaana because they dared oppose Raama. Think of aU this and 
do what is right. Save, oh, saye, the honour of pur race.” 

# Listening to these words of his sister and her praise of Seeta's 
beauty, Raavana dissolved the council and retired to muse alone. 



144 


RAAMAAYANA 


He had to think and think again* because he remembered what Maa- 
reecha had told him. He turned in his mind the pros and cons and 
finally coming to a decision, ordered a chariot to be kept ready in 
secrecy. 

It was ready, his golden chariot, drawn by mules bearing demon 
faces. Mounting it* ne passed over sea and land and cities. As he 
looked from his migic caariot at the sights of the summer season 
down below, his passion grew stronger. 

He reached Maareecha’s aashrama and met Maareecha who, 
with matted hair and bark garments, lived the life of an ascetic. Seeing 
his king and kinsman, Maareecha welcomed Raavana duly and said : 

“ Why nave you come all this way a second time and unannounoed T* 
Raavana, skilful in speech, began : “lam in great trouble from 
which only you can save me. I beg you for help. Do you know 
how my brothers, under my orders, ruled Janasthaana and how they 
and their warriors knew no opposition all these years ? But now this 
man Raama has killed them and their whole army. Without a chariot, 
and standing on the ground, his arrows have pierced to death all our 
kinsmen. Today, in the Dandaka forest, rid of Raakshasas , the 
rishis live fearless lives. This Raama is a worthless prince banished 
by his father, no doubt for some crime. He has been wandering in 
the forest alone with his wife, Seeta. This fellow, dressed like an 
ascetic but enjoying sense-pleasures, this renegade from dharma , 
proud of his strength and lor no other reason, has mutilated the face 
of my sister and insulted our race. My sister who has suffered this 
pain and shame has come and complained to me. If, with all this, 

I sit still and do nothing, would I still be a king ? 

“ To avenge myself i have decided to carry off Raama’s wife 
from the Dandaka forest. To disgrace and punish this Raama is 
a duty I owe to my race. And for this I need your help. With you 
to help me, I have no fear. In courage, strength, skill and magic 
powers, none on earth can equal you. That is why I have come to 
you. You cannot refuse me. I well tell you how you can help me* 

“ You should turn yourself into a golden deer—a golden deer 
with silver spots, casting a spell on all eyes. In that shape romp in 
front of Seeta near Raama’s aashrama. True to the character of 
women, she will insist on Raama and Lakshmana pursuing and 
Capturing you for her. When they are thus engaged and she is left 
alone, I shall easily carry her off. 

M Seeta is a most beautiful woman. Raama losing such a wife 
is sure to languish in sorrow and lose his manly spirit. It will then 
be easy to kill him and avenge ourselves.” I 

Maareecha stared at Raavana. His face became pale and his 



THE GOLDEN STAG 


145 


mouth grew parched. He was frightened by Raavana’s plan. With 
his experience of Raama’s prowess and his own wisdom born of 
penance, Maareecha saw what was going to happen. 

He knew that Raavana’s sinful purpose had not the ghost of a 
chance of success, it was clear to him that the noose of fate was 
round Raavana’s neck dragging him to inevitable, ruin. He had 
spoken no doubt of the honour of the Raakshasas> of the duties of 
kingship and of the insult to Soorpanakha ; but he was really im¬ 
pelled by a lustful desire to possess Seeta. All this Maareecha saw. 

We should analyse Soorpanakha’s motives too. She had suffered 
because of her ow.i uncontrollable carnal desire. Though it was 
Lakshmana who mutilated her she was not so angry with him as with 
Seeta who stood between her and her desire and whose beauty and 
virtue she hated as darkness hates light. 

The one desire that now burned in her heart was to avenge herself 
by bringing disgrace on Seeta. In order to use Raavana for this 
purpose, she described Seeta in such glowing terms to him and kindled 
his lawless passion. The rest of her talk was ancillary to her main 
purpose. Reference to the honour of the race, the security of his 
empire, the slaying of his kinsmen and so on was only to serve her main 
purpose which was to rouse Raavana’s lust and make him desire 
Seeta. And he was caught in the snare. 


CHAPTER XXXV 

THE GOIJDEN STAG 

Maareecha told Raavana: “ I have listened, my king, to all that 
you have said and I am filled with boundless sorrow. It is easy 
to flatter. Flattery is ever pleasant to the ears. Those who utter 
good though unpalatable advice are few ; and fewer still are those 
who welcome it when given ; yet it is my duty to speak to you the 
harsh truth. Sweet words might please you now, but will surely 
lead you to danger and ruin. 

4 ‘ Your informants have not told you the truth about Raama. 
Do not be deceived by what you have heard from others about this 
Raama. He is neither a renegade nor a criminal, but a dutiful son 
who is in the forest to honour his father’s word. Far from being a 
wdakling or coward, he is a mighty warrior, whose equal in arms does 
not exist. 

“ Do not make him your implacable enemy and bring ruin oh 
your people and your kingdom. From what you are bent upon, it 



146 


RAAMAAYANA 


looks as though Seeta was bom only to compass your ruin. The 
race of Rmkshasas and Lanka itself will soon be destroyed on your 
account. 

“ Who is the enemy that has put this disastrous thought into 
your head ? Who has given you, this bad advice to take you, your 
kingdom and your race to danger and destruction ? 

“ Who told you that he was a lover of pleasure and falsehood ? 
Raama is the embodiment of dharma . He employs his strength 
and courage in the service of dharma. As Indra is surely the first 
among the gods, Raama is first among mortal men. 

“ How dare you, how could you, cast longing eyes on Seeta ? 
Will Seeta ever yield to you ? Take her from Raama indeed ! Can 
one deceive the sun and steal from him his light ? You will be reduced 
to ashes if you approach the blazing fire of Janaka’s daughter. Do 
not fall a prey to Raama’s shafts. Do not seek your own death. 
Do not approach the fire guarded by Raama. 

“ One should not launch on a course of action without full 
thought. You can never vanquish Raama in battle. O, ruler of the 
JRaakshasas , do not turn a deaf ear to my words. Do you remember 
how, in olden days, proud of my strength, I disturbed the rites and 
sacrifice of the sage Viswaamitra. In those days Raama was but a 
boy ; yet Viswaamitra had, with Dasaratha’s permission, taken young 
Raama to protect his sacrifice. That sage knew Raama’s prowess. 

I approached the place to put out the sacrificial fire with contaminating 
blood and flesh and then I came up against the boy Raama. What 
do you think happened ? He let loose an arrow which killed Subaahu 
on the spot and with another he sv^ept me off my feet and hurled me 
into the sea. Raama the boy is now a man, immeasurably stronger 
and more skilful in arms ! 

“ Do not incur his wrath. Do not bring ruin on your people 
who are now enjoying wealth and pleasure. Do not harbour thoughts 
about Seeta and bring down destruction on your rich and beautiful 
city and certain death on yourself. If you persist in your foolish 
project, O Raavana, I see before my eyes the ruin that awaits you. 

I see Lanka in flames and her streets littered with death, and her 
widows and orphans loud in lamentation. Avoid this great sin. 
If you are angry with Raama, fight him face to face and meet your 
death like a hero. Do not follow a fraudulent path and drag me into 
it. Go back and be happy with your numerous wives. Do not 
invite Yama to your land and race !” 

Thus Maareecha earnestly pleaded for the good of Raavana 
who, however, was far from pleased Of convinced. How could good 
advice prevail on a victim of lust ? Like a sick man rejecting 



THE GOLDEN STAG 


147 


medicine, Raavana refused to listen to Maareecha’s counsel. 

“ If a king,” said Raavana, “ wants to know whether a thing 
should or should not be done, it is open to his adviser to examine 
its advantages and disadvantages. But I have not come to you for 
such advice. I am king and I have come to tell you that I have decided 
to do this. I expect and want your help to carry it out. You forget 
the loyalty due from you and dare tell me that what I contemplate 
is wrong. On this matter, I have considered everything and reached 
a decision. This insignificant creature whom you extol is unworthy 
of the honour of a formal challenge to battle from me. What more 
is he than a man driven out of his own country, a fool who has allowed 
himself to be cheated by a woman and has been deprived of his rights ? 
The proper treatment for such a fellow is to disgrace him by carrying 
off his wife. This is a matter determined and concluded. Your 
remarks are therefore irrelevant. You should do what I want you 
to do and that is not much. Transform yourself into a strange and 
beautiful stag and appear before Seeta and attract her attention. 
Seeta will send Raama to pursue and capture you. You should draw 
Raama away to a distance and simulate Raama’s voice and cry ‘ Ah, 
Seeta, ah, Lakshmana !* Hearing this, Seeta will conclude that 
Raama is in danger and she will force Lakshmana to go to his help. 
When thus she is alone, I shall carry her off to Lanka. Once you 
have rendered me this help, you will be at liberty to do what you like. 
But if you will not help me now, understand, your life shall be forfeit.” 

Maareecha thought within himself: “ The frenzied Raavana 

who is already under the shadow of doom will not listen to advice. 
Sinful desire is driving him to Yama. It is better for me to be killed 
by Raama than by Raavana. At least then I would yield my life to 
a foe.” 

And so he agreed to the proposal. 

He said : “ I have given you good advice, but you will not 
listen. If I carry out your wishes, I am sure to die, but not more 
sure than that you will also perish, not long after with all that is 
yours. So will our race. Some enemy of ours wishing our destruction 
has set you on this course, someone who envies you. I would 
rather be killed by a foe whom I respect than by you. Come, let us 
go to Dandaka.” 

Raavana was ovexjoyed and embraced Maareecha saying, “ Now 
you are again my dear old Maareecha.*' 

The two ascended the chariot and proceeded towards the Dandaka 
forest. They flew over cities, mountains, rivers and kingdoms. 
Reaching Dandaka, they espied Raama’s aashrama in a banana 
garden* 



14 # raamaayah* 

They alighted at a distance and Raavana took Maareecha by 
the hand and, pointing to the ooshrarm , told him to do his pan 
according to their plan. 

At once Maareecha transformed himself into a wonderful deer. 
Every part of the animal had its own different hue and exquisite 
beauty. Like a rainbow in the sky, it charmed the eye of the beholder. 
Gold, silver, diamonds, gems and flowers seemed to appear in succes¬ 
sion on its beautiful skin. It was like a living stream of jewels flowing 
on a beautiful golden body. 

With such surpassing beauty the magic deer wandered here and 
there, now resting for a while and now pursuing its graceful gambols. 
It would sometimes bend and nibble the grass on the ground, again 
lift its head up to eat the tender leaves of plants ; sometimes walk 
slowly near the aashrama and again jump away and disappear and 
re-appear at a distance. Sometimes it would join a herd of deer ; 
then it would part from it and walk alone. The other deer would 
smell him and move away in sudden terror. 

Seeta, who was then gathering flowers in the forest, looked at the 
stag and stared spell-bound at its wondrous beauty. The deer, too, 
stared back at her and ran here and there in front of her, shedding 
a new beauty on the landscape. 

“ Do come and look ! Do come and look !** cried Seeta, eager 
that Raama and Lakshmana too should see that wonderful stag. 

“ Come quickly, quickly !” she cried. Raama and Lakshmana 
came out of the cottage and saw the exquisite creature and marvelled 
at its beauty. 

Lakshmana grew suspicious. It seemed to him it was no ordinary 
deer, but a Raakshasa in disguise. Both Raama and Lakshmana 
had heard about Maareecha and had been told how, assuming the 
form of a deer, he would often beguile and destroy those who came 
for hunting deer in the forest. 

Lakshmana said : “ This is no ordinary animal. This is a trick 
of the Raakshasas .” 

But Seeta said : “ Do catch this deer for me. We shall bring 
it up as a pet in the aashrama . This is the most beautiful creature 
I have so far seen in this forest. Look ! Do look at it. What 
colour ! What playfulness !” 

And so she went on, talking of the deer and desiring to possess 
it. And she pleaded : “ Do somehow catch it for me.” 

She begged Raama; “ Soon we shall have to return to the city. 
Should we not take some rare thing from the forest to Ayodhya ? 
How beautiful it will be, this exquisite creature moving in the inner 
apartments of our palace ! Bharata would be so pleased. I should 



THE GOLDEN STAG 


149 * 


love to give it to him. Do my beloved, catch it for me. Somehow* 
catch it for me.” 

Seeta saw that Lakshmana did not seem to like her importunity. 
This only made her more determined to persuade Raama to get it 
for her. If a strong desire creeps into our heart and some one stands 
in the way of it, we are angry with him no matter how dear he may 
be to us. 

This unfortunate truth about the way that desire works in the 
human mind is explained clearly by the Lord in the Gita . It was 
demonstrated by what happened in Seeta’s heart now. 

“ Look !” she exclaimed, “ It is all gold ! Look now ! It is all 
silver I If you cannot capture the creature alive, at least bring it 
down with an arrow and let us take the skin home. We shall never 
again see such a beautiful skin. It would be a lovely thing to sit on. 
Look. It is going away. Do go and catch it alive. Or else, let 
me have at least the skin.” 

Again she said : “ Look, look again. All these long years, I never 
saw such a beautiful thing in these forests. It is like a cluster of 
shining stars !” 

Raama could no longer resist her entreaties. 

He said to himself : 44 Even if Lakshmana be right and the 
creature is a Raakshasa so much the better reason for killing it. What 
is there to be afraid of ? If I cannot catch it alive, I can bring it down 
with an arrow and give the skin to Seeta. When she is so keen on 
having it, is it not my duty to get it for her ?” 

And he told Lakshmana to bring him his bow and arrows. 
Lakshmana’s heart was not in it, but he obeyed. 

And Raama set out saying, “ Mind, Lakshmana, remain by 
Seeta’s side and guard her vigilantly. I shall come back soon with 
this stag alive or killed. Dp not be anxious. Even if this is a Raak - 
shasa, what does it matter ? It will share the fate of Vaataapi. If 
this has come here to cheat me, as Vaataapi tried to cheat Agastya, 
why then, it will be the victim of its own deceit. What can this animal 
do to me ? Stag or Raakshasa , it is all the same.” 

Again he said: “ Be careful. Mind Seeta. Anything might 
happen at any time. Be vigilant.” 

Destiny had set the stage for misfortune. Strangely enough 
Lakshmana, who was by nature hasty and quick to act, was suspi¬ 
cious on this occasion and Raama, who was usually circumspect, 
now yielded to Seeta’s foolish wish and disregarding Lakshmana’s. 
warning, went in pursuit of the Maareecha-stag. 

In order to give Raavana plenty of time and opportunity^ 
Maareecha kept within sight of Raama, but beyond his reach, and 



150 


RAAMAAYANA 


drew him on and on like Fate. The deer would take a few steps, 
then stop and turn and stare at the pursuer. Then suddenly it would 
start as if in fear. Pricking its ears, it would spring drawing up its 
hooves to its breast. It would disappear for a while among the trees. 
Emerging soon on some tall mound, it would display its lovely outline 
framed against a passing cloud. Sometimes it allowed near approach 
as though tired and so easy of capture but presently it would spring 
fup and bound far away. 

This went on until Maareecha took Raama far out. Then the 
iRaakshasa realised this game would not go on for ever and that his 
•end was near. Raama, tired of the pursuit, bent his bow and sent 
forth an arrow. It pierced the stag. Maareecha resumed his natural 
form and simulating Raama’s voice called out, “ Ah Seeta, ah Laksh- 
mana !” and fell dead. 

“ Lakshmana was right,” said Raama to himself. “ This deer 
was indeed a Raakshasa .” 

He thought further: “ Hearing his last cry, may be, Seeta will 
be deceived. She is likely to be overwhelmed by fear.” 

He then said to himself again: “ What if Seeta entertains false 
fears ? Lakshmana is there by her side.” 

His heart then swelled with pride and joy that he had a brother 
like Lakshmana, so loving and so steadfast. How could Raama guess 
what was happening at that very instant in the aashrama , and what 
painful words Lakshmana had to hear from Seeta ? Truly, the way 
of Destiny is cruel. 


CHAPTER XXXVI 

THE GOOD BIRD JATAAYU 

Alas, alas 1 Ah Seeta ! Ah Lakshmana !” So cried Maareecha 
■simulating Raama’s voice. And Seeta was deceived. Trembling like 
a plantain tree in a storm, she cried: “ There, Lakshmana, do you not 
hear your brother’s voice ? Run, run at once to his help !” 

Overwhelmed by fear and seeing Lakshmana unwilling to move, 
ahe appealed to Lakshmana again and again in an agony of anxiety. 
“ I hear my Lord’s voice in distress. Go, go at once ! Do not delay !” 
she cried. 44 He is in some great danger. Did you not hear his cry 
for help ? Why do you still stand here ? Your brother is no doubt 
surrounded by Raakshasas and cries for help. Instead of rushing to 
his rescue, you stand still here 



THE GOOD BIRD JATAAYU 


151 


Lakshmana knew the wiles of the Raakshasas and remembered 
his brother’s command. He would not move. 

Seeta grew furious in her agony of fear and doubt. She beat 
her breast with both hands and shouted in uncontrollable fury : 

“ Son of Sumitra ! Have you too turned foe ! Have you been an 
impostor all these years ? Have you been with us waiting only for 
Raama to die ? Pretending to be his friend, were you hoping all 
the time for his death to secure me thereafter ? Why else do you 
stand here, wicked wretch, and refuse to go to his rescue when he 
cries for help ? Traitor ! Impostor !” 

These cruel words pierced Lakshmana’s heart like poisoned 
arrows. He closed his ears with his hands. He spoke gently to 
Seeta, who was in tears of wrath : “ Vaidehi, Raama can encounter 
and vanquish any foe in the world. There is no need to fear, O more 
than mother ! Calm yourself. None in the universe is strong enough 
to touch our Raama or do him harm. What you have uttered is- 
unworthy of you, my mother. Do not fear or grieve. You will 
surely see Raama return with the body of the stag you wanted. 

“ The voice we heard was not his. It is a Raakshasa's trick. Do 
not be deceived and grieve for nothing. My brother has posted me 
here to watch over you. Do not ask me to leave you alone and go. 

I cannot disobey my brother. Since we slew the Raakshasas of 
Janasthaana, their people are trying to avenge themselves in various- 
ways. We should not be misled by their false forms and voices* 
It was not Raama’s cry for help. You need not be afraid in the 
least.” 

But Seeta’s fear grew to a frenzy and with eyes red with anger 
she uttered terrible words : “ Taking advantage of what you call 

your brother’s command, you stand unmoved by his cry of anguish 
and are prepared to let him perish ! Oh, how completely have you 
been deceiving us, Raama and me, all these years ! Base, wicked* 
selfish wretch calling yourself brother, O, you false friend, do you 
rejoice that Raama is in dire peril ? I now see why you followed us- 
into the forest. Have you been set on by Bharata ? Have you all 
become my lord’s enemies ? Have you all joined together in a wicked 
conspiracy ? I, who have lived with Raama, shall I ever look at 
you or another ? When Raama dies, I die with him. Know this 
for certain.” 

Seeta burst into a rage which completely overwhelmed Lakshr 
mana. Her cruel words pierced and burnt into him like poisoned 
arrows. His hairs stood on end. He clasped his hands in worship 
and said ; 44 O Mother I O Goddess ! How can such words issue 
from your mouth ? Like red-hot iron they bum my ears. Cruel 



as 2 


RAAMAAYANA 


.and unjust are these thoughts of yours. With all the gods for witness, 
I swear, your suspicion is wrong. I see now that after all you are a 
woman like other women quick to think evil of others. I fear a great 
^tragedy is about to befall you. Otherwise you could not have thought 
and spoken evil of me.” 

And innocent Lakshmana trembled in fear of some dire calamity 
that was to come over them. 

But Seeta said : “ Look here, here is plenty of dry fuel. I shall 
flight a fire and fall into it. Or I shall drown myself in the Godaavari. 
Or I shall hang myself dead-—unless you run immediately to the help 
<of Raama. Now, once again, I ask, will you not go ? Or shall I 
perish ?” 

She beat her breast and cried. Lakshmana could bear this no 
longer. He raised his hands in solemn worship and said : 

“ Very well, sister. I shall obey you and disobey my brother. 
I shall leave you alone—may you be safe and well. May the gods 
of the forest protect you! I shall do your bidding. I see bad omens. 
I fear greatly. I wonder if I shall ever see you with Raama again. 
Yet I shall go !” 

And he went, unwillingly and looking back every now and then. 

Lakshmana walked, his heart troubled and heavy with anger 
and sorrow. How could he bear to hear the cruel words of Seeta ? 
How could he forget them ? Sorely wounded was the heart of the 
prince who had renounced everything to be with his brother. 

Lakshmana, went in the direction that Raama had taken. 
Raavana, who had been waiting for this, now approached 
Raama’s aashrama. He transformed himself into a mendicant ascetic, 
♦clad in clean saffron clothes and his lips uttered beautiful Vedic hymns 
while in his heart was ugliest evil. 

Seeta was standing at the entrance of the cottage, her eyes fixed 
on the forest, eagerly, looking for Raama. Raavana beheld Seeta. 

At sight of her, the desire planted in his heart by Soorpanakha 
took good root and grew rapidly irresistible. He was more deter¬ 
mined than ever to possess Seeta. 

Seeing this wandering ascetic, clad in saffron clothes, carrying 
his water-pot and staff, Seeta greeted him respectfully, according to 
the courtesy due to holy men. He desired hospitality. As in duty 
bound, she offered him a seat and placed before him some fruits and 
roots as was the custom. 

The ascetic sat and looked again at Seeta. His desire grew 
stronger. Sinner and Raakshasa though he was, he had an instinct 
that made him wish to win her heart; he wished not to ravish but 
to secure Seeta’s willing consent and make her his wife. 



IKE GOOD BIRD JATAAYU 


153 ^ 


The King of Lanka wanted and hoped to persuade Seeta. Ho 
thought she would yield to him for his wealth and power, turning 
her back on poverty-stricken Raama. He thought also that this- 
would be the best way of disgracing and punishing Raama. Ho 
expected Seeta to behave like other women he had known. 

Seated in front of the fruits and roots offered by Seeta, the ascetic 
began to praise Seeta’s beauty in terms too warm for a genuine ascetic. 
He dwelt on the charms of her person and asked : “ Who are you 7 

Why are you here alone in the forest haunted by Raakshasas and 
wild beasts ?” 

She was astonished but answered his questions. She hoped the 
prince would return at once and kept her eyes fixed on the doorway. 

Little by little the visitor revealed who he was and described the 
greatness of his origin and family, his power and wealth. After 
exalting himself, he proceeded to run down Raama and concluded : 

“ Be my wife and live a glorious life with me in Lanka. Come, 
let us go 1” 

In this unexpected situation, Seeta’s purity gave her courage 
to defy the powerful monster whom she now knew for what he was. 

44 Base and wicked fellow ! Your destruction is near. Leave 
this aashrama if you would escape with life !” she said, hissing like 
an angry cobra. 

The Raakshasa was furious. He completely threw off all pre¬ 
tence of disguise and gentleness and assumed his real irrperious 
wickedness. With one hand he caught hold of her hair and with 
the other lifted her up and carried her to the chariot which waited 
for him behind the trees, and forcing her into it, rose with her into 
the air. 

Seeta cried aloud : 44 O my lord ! Where are you, my Raama ?' 
Oh Lakshmana, most faithful of friends, why did I, with obstinate 
folly, drive you away ?” 

The Raakshasa held her firmly down and drove on in the aerial 
car. Seeta addressed the trees and plants down below and begged 
them to tell Raama of her fate. 

It happened that old Jataayu, half-asleep upon a tree saw the 
chariot flying past. Startled by a woman’s cry of distress he was- 
wide awake in a moment and recognised Seeta by her voice. She 
also saw him and appealed to him for rescue. 

Jataayu’s blood was fired by the sight of her piteous plight and 
he threw himself in the way of the aerial car crying : 44 Hold, hold !’ 
What is all this T* 

“Hie King of Lanka is carrying me away by force,” wailed 
Seeta, 44 but what can you do to prevent it, my poor old friend T 



154 


RAAMAAYANA 


O, fly to Raama and Lakshmana and tell them my helpless plight 1” 

But Jataayu’s fighting blood, the blood of generations of lordly 
ancestors who ruled the air and knew not fear, was on fire ; he cared 
not for Raavana and his might ; he only saw a princess in distress ; 
he thought of his friend Dasaratha and his promise to Raama and 
he was resolved that this outrage should not occur while he lived to 
prevent it. 

Jataayu now addressed Raavana directly: “ Oh king, I am Jataayu, 
king of the eagles, a king like you. Listen to me, brother king ! 
Forbear from this wicked act. How can you call yourself a king and 
•do this shameful wrong ? Is it not the rule of kings to protect the 
honour of women ? And Seeta is a princess. I warn you, you shall 
surely perish unless you leave her and go. Her very look; will reduce 
you to ashes. You are carrying a venomous cobra in your bosom. 
The noose of Yama is round your neck and dragging you to 
perdition. 

“I am old and unarmed and you are young, fully armed and 
•seated in a chariot. Yet I cannot look on, while you carry off Seeta. 
Why do you do this cowardly act behind Raama’s back ? If you 
have any grievance against him, meet him face to face. O, you would 
fly away from me, would you ? You shall not escape while I am 
alive ! I care not for your chariot or your ten heads, or your glit¬ 
tering arms ! Your heads shall roll on the ground that you have 
polluted with your presence. Get down from your car, and fight if 
you are not a coward as well as a thief !” 

Raavana flared up in a rage. He attacked Jataayu. It was 
like a clash between a mighty wind and a massive rain-cloud. The 
battle raged in the sky above the forest, Jataayu fought like a winged 
mountain. 

Raavana aimed deadly darts at him. But the eagle intercepted 
them all and with his talons tore Raavana’s flesh. The enraged 
Maakshasa despatched sharp, serpent-like missiles against the bird. 

The bird-hero was desperately wounded, but fought on un¬ 
dauntedly while Seeta watched the unequal combat with beating 
heart and tearful eyes. The sight of her made Jataayu all the fiercer 
«n his attacks on Raavana. But his years were telling on him and he 
felt he must gather all his strength for a supreme attempt to conquer. 
Regardless of the wounds, he attacked Raavana fiercely and with 
bis wings broke off and threw down his jewelled crown and deprived 
him of his bow. He attacked the chariot and killed the demon-faced 
mules and the charioteer and smashed the vehicle into a thousand 
pieces. Raavana fell on the ground, stifl dutdiii^ Seeta. The 
elements rejoiced to see Raavana fall. 



CLOSELY GUARDED 


155 


The gallant old bird swooped down on Raavana’s back and tore 
great chunks of flesh off it, and tried to wrench off the arms which 
held Seeta. But Raavana had twenty arms, and no sooner was one 
pulled off than another took its place and Seeta was held in writhing 
helplessness. 

\ At last Raavana let go Seeta and unsheathing his sword cut off 
the bird’s wings and talons. The old bird was now helpless and fell 
on the ground unable to move. 

Jaanaki ran and embraced Jataayu and cried : “Omy father l 
You have given away your life for my sake. You are a second father 
to my Lord. And now you are no more. O our devoted brave 
friend !” 

Then Raavana turned towards her to take her up again. Help¬ 
lessly she ran hither and thither, crying. She clung to the trees and 
cried : “Omy Raama, where are you ? O Lakshmana, where are 
you ? Won’t you come to my rescue ?” The Raakshasa at last 
caught her and rose in the air. 

As the dark and massive Raavana flew in the sky with her, Seeta 
struggling in his grasp looked like a flash of lightning across a great 
black cloud. The Raakshasa carrying her appeared like a mountain 
covered by a forest-fire. The body of Raavana, lit up by Seeta,. 
coursed through the sky like a calamitous comet. 

Thus was Seeta carded away by the Raakshasa. The sun grew 
dim and untimely darkness descended on the earth. 

All beings lamented : 44 Dharma is destroyed. Righteousness- 
has disappeared. Virtue and pity are no more.” 

The dumb creatures of the earth, looking upwards, shed tears. 

Raavana, cruelly clutching the princess, flew*—as towards his 
ruin. As she was carried away, the petals fell down from the flowers 
she was wearing at that time and as they were strewn along the path 
below, it seemed to announce the scattering of Raavana’s fortune 
and affluence. x 


CHAPTER XXXVn 

CLOSELY GUARDED 

Seeta opened her eyes red with anger and grief, and facing Raavana; 
cried 44 Base fellow ! You boasted of your fame and your great 
origin and your warlike qualities, but have you behaved like a bravo 
warrior ? Are you not ashamed of yourself ? What sort of warrior 
is he who waits for the husband’s absence to steal his wife and carrier 



a56 


RAAMAAVANA 


•off a lonely helpless woman when no one is near to prevent it ? 

“ What heroic deed to kill the old bird that tried to save me l 
How brave was your talk in the ooshrama ! The world will no doubt 
remember and praise this great hero who dares not fight but is 
prepared to steal f If indeed you come of a noble family, wh^t 
a shame you have brought upon it ! 

“ And what do you hope by thus carrying me off ? How long 
do you hope to live ? Very soon Raama’s arrows will seek you out 
and end your life. Know that the moment Raama sets eyes on you, 
you are dead. Do not hope to escape. Your death is certain at 
his hands. Whit then do you gain by this cheating ? I will never be 
^ours. I shall die before I yield to you and you cannot escape my 
lord, having incurred his wrath. Very soon you will see the river 
Vaitarani in hell. The red-hot image is awaiting you there for your 
■embrace. So is the tree with iron spikes. Raama within an hour, 
slew your army of myriad Raakshasas in Janasthaana. Will he let 
you escape ? Soon will he send you to Yama.” 

While Seeta was speaking words of contempt and warning, 
Raavana, chariot-less, sped like an arrow across the sky towards 
Lanka. They went over many mountains and rivers and Seeta saw 
some people below standing on a hill-top. She took off her sash 
and tying up her jewels in it threw the bundle down. 

She did this hoping that the ornaments thus dropped may be 
^een by Raama and give him a clue of the direction in which she was 
♦carried away. 

Crossing the Pampa and then the sea, Raavana entered the city 
•of Lanka. He went to his apartments with the grief-stricken Seeta. 
The fool thought that he had secured the prize, but he was taking 
home his own death in a woman’s form. Then, summoning some 
demon-like Raakshasis , he ordered them to keep watch over Seeta, 
specially commanding them to let none approach her without his 
permission. 

“ Give her whatever she wants, clothes or gold or jewels. Serve 
her and do her honour as you would serve and honour me, ” he en¬ 
joined them. 

And he added the warning: “ Anyone who utters a word which 
might offend her will be punished with death. No one, knowingly 
or unknowingly, should cause her anger or grief.” 

Having thus installed Seeta in the inner apartment, he considered 
-what should be done next. He sent for some clever spies and gave 
them this mandate : 

44 Go at once to Janasthaana where Khara lived. Watch care¬ 
fully and bring me word what Raama is doing. So long ai that 



CLOSELY GUARDED 


157 


Raama is alive, I cannot sleep. He is my greatest foe. Somehow, 
he should be killed. Go boldly now and do your job and return.” 

Imprisoned within a fortress in a sea-girt island, Seeta did not 
know where she was or how far from Raama. She expected that 
her lord would somehow arrive, kill Raavana and redeem her. 

Though full of grief, thinking of the strength and prowess of her 
lord she was bold and steady in mind. It was also some consolation 
that the Raakshasa king did not behave like a beast with her. 

Having despatched his men to Janasthaana, Raavana returned 
to Seeta’s presence. He saw her overwhelmed by grief and shedding 
tears. The Raakshasis were watching her with care. 

He thought that if she saw his wealth and power she would 
yield to him. She was therefore taken round in the great palace and 
shown the wealth and grandeur there displayed. No king on earth 
had ever possessed such wealth and means of enjoyment. 

Seeta was shown gold and jewels and silks in plenty ; curiously- 
wrought platforms, vehicles and towers ; thousands of maid-servants 
and every symbol of wealth and royal power. But her thoughts 
were elsewhere. 

Raavana tried to convince her also of the vastness of his army. 
Burthen she had already formed her opinion of his prowess and had 
described it to him in scathing terms. 

Yet, Raavana argued : “ All this you can count and enjoy as 

your own. You shall be my queen, dearer to me than life itself, 
I have many wives but you shall be mistress of them all. Hereafter 
my love shall be for you and you alone. Listen to me. Do my 
desire. For hundreds of miles the sea surrounds this island which is 
guarded by thousands of mighty soldiers. No one can enter this 
city. No one among the gods or Asuras can match me in might ; 
and they know it What pleasure or honour is it for you to stick to 
a poor human creature banished from his kingdom, a destitute wan¬ 
dering in the forest ? To match your beauty, you need my wealth. 
Do not waste the years of your youth. You are never again going 
to set eyes on Raama ; be certain of that. Raama cannot approach 
this city. Treat this whole kingdom as yours. Treat me and all 
the obedient gods as your slaves. Till now, because of your sins in 
some previous birth, you have suffered hardship. Hereafter you 
will enjoy with me the fruits of your former merits. You will be the 
queen of Lanka and the wife of the Lord of Lanka, the conqueror 
of Kubera. Let us take our pleasure floating about the world in the 
Pushpaka vimaana . Let the cloud of sorrow disappear from your 
face and let the moon of joy appear.” 

As Raavana went on speaking thus, tears flowed from Seeta’s 



158 


RAAMAA YANA * 


eyes. She covered her face with the end of her sari as she did not 
want her enemies to think that she was afraid. 

Raavana begged and importuned her : “ Do not be shy. There 
is nothing wrong in accepting me, nothing to be ashamed of. It is 
laid down that one should accept the gifts of God. O beautiful one ! 
I bow my head at your feet and beg you for your grace. I am your 
slave. Forgetting my greatness and power, I thus beg for your favour. 
Never in my life have I bowed in this way before anyone.” 

He really thought he could persuade her and gain her affection. 

If one’s mind is clear, one can courageously face any situation. 
In spite of her grief therefore, Seeta spoke boldy to the Raakshasa. 
She placed a little bit of grass between Raavana and herself before 
answering him. 

Boastful words were uttered by Raavana in sanyasi garb, sitting 
in front of the fruit served by her in Panchavati. Imprisoned Seeta 
now spoke as if in echo of those words. 

“ Know who I am. Dasaratha was famed in all the three worlds 
and reigned long years and stood as a bulwark of dharma and defender 
of truth. His son Raama, of godlike presence and lion-like valour, 
is my husband. He and his brother Lakshmana will surely take 
your life. You know how Khara and his army were destroyed in 
Janasthaana by my lord. As easily as an eagle carries a venomous 
serpent, he destroyed your huge army in Janasthaana. Because you 
have secured a boon that no god or Asura can kill you, you have 
dared to make Raama your enemy. You think your boon will save 
you. But I tell you, you cannot escape. You will surely meet your 
death at his hands. You are, like the goat tied to the altar-post for 
sacrifice, doomed to death. The moment Raama sets his angry eyes 
on you, you will meet your fate. My lord will dry up the sea or 
bring down the moon, if necessary, to kill you and redeem me. It is 
certain. Your evil deed will bring destruction on yourself and your 
kingdom. My noble lord lived unafraid in the midst of the Raakshasas 
in the forest. Like a hero, he fought and killed the Raakshasas who 
encountered him. Like a thief, you stole me in his absence. But 
you cannot escape. Your fate impelled you to this sin because the 
hour of your ruin and the destruction of your race are near. 

“ You ask me to accept you. How foolish! Can the crow 
approach the swan ? Can a heinous sinner be allowed near the 
sacrificial fire ? I do not value life or body. Do you imagine I would 
wish to live despised by the world ? Do not dream that out of fear 
or for saving my life I shall yield to you.” 

Having spoken these words, she was silent. 

** Is that so ?” said Raavana. ” Very well then, I shall give 



RAAMA DISCONSOLATE 


159 


you twelve months’ time. If you agree to accept me, well and good. 
If, at the end of that period, you refuse, my cooks will make meat of 
your body for my breakfast.” 

After warning Seeta thus, he gave orders to the attendant Raak- 
shasis : “ You should break her pride and obstinacy by some means 
or other. Put her alone in the Asoka garden and skilfully use fear 
and temptation to bring her to her senses. As we tame a wild she- 
elephant, you should train her to submission.” And angrily he went 
to his palace. 

The Raakshasis took Seeta to the Asoka garden. It was a beauti¬ 
ful park attached to the women’s apartments. The trees were full 
of flowers and fruit, and beautiful birds played among them. Here, 
surrounded and guarded by terribly ugly Raakshasis , Seeta was kept 
prisoner. 

Though overwhelmed by grief, she had the faith that Raama 
and Lakshmana would somehow discover where she was and rescue 
her, that her lord would destroy Raavana and take her back to a 
happy life with him. 

Sustained by this faith, she was neither frightened by threats 
nor deceived by temptations. Not for one day, or two, but for 
months, Seeta suffered thus a close prisoner in the Asoka garden. 

The day was yet far off when the mighty Hanumaan, crossing 
the sea, would visit Seeta in her sorrow and bring her the message 
of hope and love and the assurance of relief: “ Raama loves you 
infinitely : he will be here soon. Be not afraid.” 

All the women in our land who suffer sorrow in any way are 
so many replicas of Seeta. May all the men be, like Hanumaan, 
pure and heroic helpers of such suffering women ! 

We shall now go to Raama and Lakshmana. 


CHAPTER XXXVm 

RAAMA DISCONSOLATE 

When Maareecha was struck by Raama’s arrow and was about to 
die, he resumed his own Raakshasa shape and cried aloud in a voice 
which was an exact imitation of Raama’s, “ Ah Lakshmana, ah 
Seeta!” 

Raama now realised how the Raakshasa had beguiled them 
and how he had been drawn away a long distance by the crafty 
Maareecha, and he was full of anxiety as to what it all could mean. 
“Alas, we have been badly deceived. It would be terrible if 



160 


RAAMAAYANA 


Lakshmana is also deceived by this cry and leaves Seeta alone to 
come to my succour. It looks as though the Raakshasas have planned 
this ruse to carry off Seeta and eat her. When Seeta hears what she 
will take as my cry of distress she is sure to insist on Lakshmana 
leaving her and rushing to my help. The howling of jackals and the 
behaviour of birds do portend disaster. There is trepidation in my 
heart and it is a portent in itself of some danger close at hand.” 

Saying thus to himself, Raama hurried back to the aashrarrta . 
On the way he saw Lakshmana running towards him. “ Alas, the 
worst I fear has happened,” exclaimed Raama. 

He held Lakshmana’s hands and cried in sorrow : “ Why did 
you leave Seeta alone in the forest, Lakshmana ? You may be sure 
the Raakshasas have killed and eaten her. It was not right for you 
to leave her and come away. It is now all over with Seeta!” 

Fatigued and thirsty with the futile chase, and now overwhelmed 
with anger and unbearable anxiety, Raama cried again : “ If I do 

not see Seeta in the aashrama when we return, I shall surely die, 
Lakshmana. You will return to Ayodhya, the survivor of us three, 
and tell them what has happened. O, how will Kausalya bear her 
grief? Lakshmana, you have more than fulfilled Kaikeyi’s wishes. 
The Raakshasas will by now have visited on Seeta, on poor unprotected 
Seeta, all their pent-up hatred against us. They must have killed 
and eaten her up by now. How could you leave her alone and come 
away ? How could you be deceived by Maareecha’s false cry ? 
What shall I do now ? I shall see Seeta no more. The Raakshasas 9 
plan has succeeded. My trust in you was misplaced and I shall 
never see Seeta. How could you leave her and come away, how 
could you, Lakshmana ?” 

Lakshmana answered with tears in his eyes : “ What else, 

brother, could I do ? When Seeta heard the cry, ‘ Alas Seeta ! Alas 
Lakshmana V she was frightened. Quivering with fear she urged 
me to go to you at once and would tolerate no delay. She persisted, 
whatever I said to the contrary. I told her again and again not to be 
afraid and assured her that no foe was strong enough to do you harm, 
and that the cry of distress was not yours, but she would not listen. 
She charged me with having turned traitor to you and with having 
accompanied to the forest with treasonable intentions ; and O brother, 
she found it possible in her anguish to say I would be glad of your 
death out of sinful intentions towards herself ! I was half dead with 
horror on hearing those words of hers and then, she announced that 
she would kill herself if I did not go on the instant. Mad herself, 
she maddened me with her words of reproach and I ran towards 
you not knowing what else to do.” 



RAAMA DISCONSOLATE 


161 


But Raama was not satisfied. “ Whatever a foolish woman might 
have said in her fright, you should have stayed and not left her un¬ 
protected. How could you do such a foolish thing ? You have 
brought calamity on me. I shall never see Seeta again.” 

The two hurried to the aashrama . Many bad omens appeared on 
their way. And Raama repeated, as he saw them one by one : “ I 

fear, I fear we shall never see Seeta again!” 

Reaching the aashrama , they found it, as they had feared, empty. 
Seeta was not there. The deer skin, the kusa grass, the mat spread 
as a seat, all lay scattered on the ground. 

Raama wept and ran hither and thither in the grove round the 
cottage. The leaves and flowers on the trees had faded. Seeta was 
nowhere to be seen. 

He wandered about like one mad. His eyes were bloodshot. 
He cried : “ Alas, have they eaten her up ? Have they carried her 
away ? O, how she must have trembled in terror ! 1 cannot bear 

the thought of it. Could it be that she has gone to the river to fetch 
water ? Could it be that she has gone out to cull flowers ? Let 
us see.” 

And he went searching among the trees, hoping that perhaps 
she was hiding and playing a practical joke on him. 

His sorrow swelled like the sea and seemed to have drowned his 
reason. He called the trees one by one by their names and beseeched 
them for help. 

“ Oh Asoka tree ! Be true to your name, remove my sorrow. 
You must know the truth. Tell me, where is Seeta now ? Oh tall 
palm tree ! You must be able to see where Seeta is. Tell me where 
she is.” 

He talked to the animals too : “ Oh tiger !” he said : ” The 
elephant and the deer are afraid to tell me the truth. But you know 
no fear. You can tell me what has happened. You know everything. 
Tell me then the truth.” 

He cried : “ Oh Seeta, you are hiding somewhere. There 1 
There ! I see you there ! Stop this fooling. I can stand it no 
longer.” 

After wandering and weeping in vain for a long time, he fell 
on the ground, moaning, “ Ha Lakshmana ! Ha Seeta !” He cried 
like an elephant trapped in a pit. 

“ Lakshmana, Seeta is nowhere. The Raakshasas have captured 
her and torn her to pieces and eaten her up. How can I live any 
more ? My end is near. But when my father sees me in the other 
world, he will say, 4 Why have you come here, my son, before fulfilling 
my command V I have failed. In everything, I have failed.” 

R.—« 



162 


RAAMAAYANA 


Lakshmana could bear this sight no longer. “Brother, It is 
not right that you should cry like this,” he said. “ Let us search 
through the forest. You know how fond Seeta is of entering caves 
and thickets. She may be bathing in the river or playing somewhere 
or culling flowers. Let us search again. She is only testing us. Come, 
let us search again. Do not cry.” 

The two searched again all over the place on hills, by pools and 
on the river bank. But they did not find her. 

“ Seeta is not to be seen, Lakshmana, ” said Raama. “ What 
shall I do now ?” 

Lakshmana tried to encourage him with words of hope, but 
Raama was inconsolable. “ No, no, my brother. There is no hope,” 
he said. “ Seeta is nowhere. I have lost her for ever. I shall live 
no more.” 

He lay unconscious for a time. Then he came to himself and 
lifted his voice and wept. Nothing that Lakshmana said could 
comfort him. 

“Lakshmana, how can I go back to Ayodhya?” he cried. 
“Won’t they laugh at me for returning alone after allowing Seeta 
to be killed and eaten by Raakshasas ? Having brought her to the 
forest and having failed to protect her, what shall I tell Janaka ? 

“No, you should go alone to Ayodhya. Go and look after 
our mothers. Greet Bharata from me and tell him it was my dying 
wish that he should continue to rule as king.” 

All Lakshmana’s efforts to console him were in vain. He was 
convinced that the Raakshasas had carried away Seeta and torn 
her to pieces and eaten her up. He pictured to himself in detail 
the horror of her suffering and cried in his grief: “I must have com¬ 
mitted terrible sins. How else could such suffering come to me ? 

“Seeta who accompanied me thinking I could protect her has 
been eaten by the Raakshasas and I can do nothing about it. Is 
there another sinner like me in the world ? ” 

Lakshmana' said : “Do not lose heart. You must be bold and 
energetic. A resolute mind can conquer fate. But you must first 
Conquer your weakness. Let us make a more thorough search of 
the forest. Instead of yielding to unavailing sorrow, let us be manly 
and active.” But Raama would not listen, 

Raama behaved as a human being, not an avataar of Vishnii. 
Though elsewhere his words and actions give room for a different 
View, here Vaalmeeki describes Raama as a mere man enveloped 
in the gloom of a supreme misfortune. 

His feelings and behaviour are exactly those of any noble and 
virtuous man who has lost his beloved wife, dearer to him than life 



A SECOND FATHER DIES 10 

itself, and that in a forest infested with Raakshasas . We see that 
all the efforts of Lakshmana to console him had no effect. 

Our common human dharma is illustrated by the sorrow of 
Raama. We see here the picture of true and equal love between 
a virtuous man and woman and the anguish of loss. 

The episode may also be interpreted allegorically. Raama’s 
sense of privation, when he misses Seeta, is a measure and image 
of the mind of God when a single human soul is lost through sin. 

One may ask whether God can lose, or can suffer pain of mind. 
If one realises that all life is divine leela —the play of God—no further 
exegesis is needed. Sin, merit, devotion—all are aspects of that 
sport. 

Each one of us is beloved of the Lord. If for any reason we 
are swept away from the right path, He suffers like a lover who 
has lost his love. And His sorrow too is a part of His great play. 


CHAPTER XXXIX 

A SECOND FATHER DIES 

The two brothers searched every mountain, forest and river-bank 
calling Seetafc oame aloud. But all in vain, and they did not so 
much as find a clue anywhere. Baffled and grief-stricken, Raama 
cried out against the river Godaavari, against the gods and against 
the five elements. 

The Poet-Sage ascribes the silence of the rivers and the gods 
and elements to their fear of the powerful Raakshasa king. A herd 
of deer, however, moving southwards seemed to indicate to Raama 
and Lakshmana that they too should travel in the same direction. 
They did so and, after a time, found some flowers scattered on the 
way. 1 

Raama at once recognised the flowers and cried excitedly : 
“These are the very flowers I gave her. They must have fallen from 
her hair.” 

His grief and anxiety grew greater and he sobbed aloud, fearing 
the worst for Seeta. 

They searched the forest all around the spot, where they found 
the flowers. They noticed the marks of a Raakshasa's big feet and 
little foot-prints which they knew were Seeta’s. 

They found some gold beads spilt from Seeta’s jewels. Raama 
cried again : “Look ! The Raakshasa has been chasing her like a 
beast of prey to tear her tender flesh ! ” 



164 


RAAMAAYANA 


Then they saw several fragments of a chariot and great clots 
of blood, as also royal headgear and jewels scattered on the ground. 
They wondered what these things could mean. 

Soon they came upon a large bow broken, a flag torn and armour 
crushed. A little later they saw the dead bodies of a charioteer 
and of mules. It was clear that a vehement battle had been fought 
on that spot. 

“Two powerful Raakshasas must have struggled here,” groaned 
Raama, “each claiming the sole right to eat Seeta.” 

Conjecturing and lamenting in this way, Raama went on ; 
“Dharma could not save Seeta ! No god came to her rescue ! It 
will be right to destroy this wicked world.” Raama was beside 
himself and talked wildly. 

Lakshmana did his best to calm the distracted Raama. “Great 
sorrow unbalances all minds, even the strongest,” he said. “Else, 
why should you thus lose self-control? Why should you hate and 
curse the whole world for the evil deed of one person ? How often 
have you, my brother, calmed my anger and led me on the right 
path ! But now a great grief has upset your mind and it is the turn 
of the younger brother to give courage and counsel patience to the 
elder and restore him to his natural heroism. Let us find out who 
our enemy is and deal with him.” 

With such loving words Lakshmana sought to give courage 
and consolation, and both walked on. They had not proceeded far 
when they came on Jataayu, bloody and mutilated, unrecognisable, 
lying on the ground. 

At first Raama thought it was some Raakshasa disguising him¬ 
self to deceive them and, wild with anger, cried: “Look! There is 
the Raakshasa who has eaten Seeta!” and rushed towards him, bow 
in hand. 

Then raising his ruffled and gory head with great pain, Jataayu 
spoke in a feeble voice that seemed struggling with death. “Do not 
kill me, dear Raama, who has but a few moments more to live ! 
The dear princess you are searching for has been carried off by Raavana 
and he could do so only by first robbing me of my life ! 

“Seeing Seeta in his flying chariot in the air, I intercepted it and 
gave him battle. I struck down his bow and smashed his chariot. 
His charioteer I slew. The marks of my last great fight you can see 
all round this place. I did my best—how I wish it were better for 
your sake ! At'last as, weary with toil, I was still waging a hopeless 
combat—age against youth, beak and talons against keen weapons 
and panoply of steel, he cut off my wings and legs and as 1 fell 
wounded to death, he lifted Seeta and flew with her into the sky in a 



A SECOND FATHER DIES 


165 


southern direction. Though racked with the pangs of death, I have 
clung to life for love of you to tell you what I know. Now that I 
have done this, bless me and let me die.” 

Tears flowed from Raama’s eyes as he listened to Jataayu’s tale. 
He flung aside his bow and embraced the bird. The princes’ sorrow 
knew no bounds. They lamented loudly, rolling on the ground. 

“I am the most unhappy man alive, Lakshmana,” said Raama: 
“Giving up the kingdom, I came to the forest, and here I have lost 
my Seeta. This Jataayu, who was a second father to us, has laid 
down his life for my sake. 

“Why, if I fell into the fire, I fear my bad luck will put even the 
fire out. If I fell into the sea, I fear it would dry up. What a terrible 
sinner I am, Lakshmana! Who knows, one day I might lose you 
too, Lakshmana.” 

Embracing Jataayu, he said: “O, my father! Really, did you 
see Seeta?” But Jataayu lay speechless on the ground. 

After a few moments Jataayu spoke again in a low voice : “Be 
not afraid, Raama. You will surely find Seeta. No harm will come 
to her. Regaining the treasure you have lost, you will greatly rejoice.” 
With these words, he spat out blood and gave up life. 

They were foolish and committed errors of omission and com¬ 
mission and lost Seeta. Trying to save Seeta from the calamity that 
their carelessness had brought upon her, Jataayu, old, unarmed, 
had fought with wing and beak and talon and given up his life. When 
their father died in Ayodhya, his obsequies were performed by Bharata 
and Satrughna. Raama and Lakshmana were denied this privilege 
because they were away in the forest. They regarded Jataayu as 
their own father and in performing his obsequies derived some 
consolation for not being by Dasaratha’s side and performing the last 
offices to him. What other help or honour could they accord to 
heroic Jataayu ? 

The bhaktas worship Jataayu as the best of bhaktas . Exercising 
our imagination, we should behold with Seeta’s eyes the poor old 
bird’s hard struggle against the Raakshasa king. Then we would 
realise the love and gratitude and sorrow that must have surged 
in her heart as she watched his sufferings. Thus we shall be purified 
by the grace of the Mother. What wonder is there in the rank assigned 
to Jataayu among the bhaktas ? 

Later, when Raama fights and is victorious in Lanka, Seeta 
does not see it; she is a prisoner in the Asoka forest. She has to 
be content with listening to reports of the battle and of the prowess 
of her lord. But Jataayu’s devotion and heroism Seeta saw with 
her own eyes in the Dandaka forest. Unarmed, he opposed the 



166 


RAAMAAYANA 


Raakshasa who had all his weapons and armour, and humbled his 
pride at the cost of his own life. 

Jataayu’s battle with Raavana is more important than the 
battles in Lanka. Hence the pious revere Jataayu along with Bharata 
and look upon him as an Aalvaar , a guide in the holy path. 

“Lakshmana,” said Raama, “gather dry faggots. I shall churn 
the fire. We failed to perform our father’s obsequies—let us do it 
for the eagle-father who gave up his life for us.” 

The princes chanted holy invocations as they poured libations 
to the departed spirit: “O king of birds, may you enjoy all the bliss 
of the virtuous who perform great sacrifices! May you enjoy the 
bliss of Vaanaprasthas who have performed great penance ! May 
you enjoy the bliss of those who have made great gifts of land ! May 
you enjoy the bliss of those who fight heroically in the field of battle! 
May the bliss of all good people be yours!” After the ceremony 
Raama became steadier and stronger in mind. 

To millions of men, women and children in India, the Raamaa- 
yana is not a mere tale. It has more truth and meaning than the 
events in one’s own life. Just as plants grow under the influence 
of sun-light, the people of India grow in mental strength and culture 
by absorbing the glowing inspiration of the Raamaayana. 

When we see any helpless person in danger or difficulty, let us 
think of Jataayu and with firm mind try to help regardless of circum¬ 
stance. 

Raama’s losing health and lamenting in sorrow may be compared 
to the behaviour of another incarnation honoured by another faith. 

It is said in the Bible that Jesus, nailed to the cross and about to 
give up his ghost, cried with a loud voice, “Eloil Eloil lama sabach - 
thaanil ” which is Hebrew for “My God, My God, why have you 
forsaken me ?” 

The mystery of incarnations is ever the same. They are weighted 
with the dust and tears of the body they have taken and suffer and 
grieve like mortals. 


CHAPTER XL 

LEFT EYELIDS THROB 

In face of the unexpected difficulties that overtook them one after 
another, Raama and Lakshmana often lost heart. Their fortitude 
yielded place sometimes to great despair. But they managed to 
encourage each other and proceeded on their way. 

Passing through die forest, the two princes were suddenly caught 



LEFT EYELIDS THROB 


167 


by a tremendously big Raakshasa of ugly form without head or feet. 
His mouth was in his great belly and he had two enormous arms 
which, without moving from his place, he would stretch out and 
clutch tiger, bear or any other living thing within reach, and swallow 
them. 

He had only one eye which was placed in his chest but which was 
terrible to behold. 

Caught by this monster, the princes were, for a while, bewil¬ 
dered and did not know what to do. 

Then Raama told Lakshmana: “Let us not be confused. You 
will cut off one arm, I shall cut off the other.” 

And so they did. The name of this monster was Kabandha, 
which means the barrel-shaped one. Once his arms were severed, he 
was helpless and began to explain : 

“On account of my evil deeds I was cursed by Indra to bear 
this form and this name. I believe you are Raama and Lakshmana. 
Indra promised me freedom from the curse when you two should 
come and cut off my arms and commit this body of mine to the 
flames. 

The princes set fire to his body as desired by the unfortunate 
monster and there arose from the flames a lovely being which entered 
a heavenly chariot and ascended to the celestial world. 

Before going, he said to Raama : “You will assuredly regain 
Seeta. Go to the beautiful banks of the Pampa and seek the help 
of Sugreeva living there on the Rishyamooka hill. Driven out of 
the kingdom by his brother Vaali, he lives in constant fear and danger. 
Gain his friendship, and you will succeed in your attempt.” Saying 
this Kabandha disappeared. 

Raama and Lakshmana now set forward in the direction of 
the Pampa. In that lovely region they visited the aashrama of the 
aged sanyaasini , Sabari, the disciple of Rishi Matanga, and accepted 
her hospitality. 

Sabari wa&m woman of a forest tribe and a faithful serving sister 
in the aashrdtiw&t the old saint Matanga. When he departed this 
life, she wanted to die too; but he said the time was not yet and she 
should await the arrival of Raama, an incarnation of Vishnu, for the 
bliss of his darshan was in store for her. So the old and wrinkled 
woman lived her saintly life, looking faithfully after the aashrama 
as of old and keeping it sweet to receive the promised guest. 

When the princes came, she produced the fruits she had gathered 
and kept for them, and described and showed to them the wonders 
of Matanga aashrama. Then with their leave, she kindled a fire 
and entering it ascended to heaven. 



168 


RAAMAAYANA 


The meeting with this saintly woman and the waters of the river 
Pampa gave strength of mind to the princes. They thought over 
what should be done next. 

Said Raama: “Lakshmana, I am beginning to think that we 
shall succeed. Let us search the forest for Sugreeva whose help we 
should obtain.” 

They went all over the Pampa area. The place was lovely, 
but the loveliness of the spot and the animals, birds, trees and creepers 
only increased Raama’s grief. 

Every beautiful object wrung his heart and made him think, 
“How much would Seeta have enjoyed this?” Try as he might, he 
could not control the human sorrow which by his incarnation he 
had undertaken tp endure. 

Lakshmana tried to revive his spirit. He said: “Even if Seeta 
is kept hidden in the womb of Aditi, the mother of the gods, we 
will discover her. Raavana cannot escape. It is certain we shall 
kill him and redeem Seeta. It is not proper that you should thus 
despair. How can you let anxiety or weakness come over you ? 
If we lose a precious thing, we should work for its recovery with 
perseverance. Sometimes our very affection becomes our enemy. 
Too much love brings on grief and grief weakens effort. What 
need is there for me to tell you all this? You know it all. Let us 
not lose hope; let us forget -the grief brought on by love and bend 
our mind and body to exertion. Be brave. Be hopeful. We shall 
succeed. Get rid of your sorrow, brother!” 

The younger brother thus advised Raama. Commentators 
look upon Lakshmana as Aadisesha. Aadisesha the serpent is said 
to be ever the protecting spirit of Vishnu. So Lakshmana ever tried 
to give Raama fresh energy and enthusiasm. 

The fugitive Vaanara prince Sugreeva and his faithful adherents 
with the watchful vigilance of fear saw Raama and Lakshmana 
roving in the forests and were troubled with doubts. Having been 
ejected from his kingdom by Vaali, Sugreeva chose this mountainous 
spot because he believed that it was made by the curse of a rishi 
inaccessible to Vaali. And now he feared that here, too, Vaali in 
disguise was following him in order to kill him. 

Or else, he feared, some Kshatriya warriors taking the side of 
Vaali were there to kill him. The other Vaanaras ran hither and 
thither in panic. 

Hanumaan was Sugreeva’s chief minister. He reassured Sug¬ 
reeva, saying: “This is not Vaali, nor are they friends of Vaali, It 
seems to me. There is no ground for fear. 1 shall go and talk to 
them and find out the truth.” 



LEFT EYELIDS THROB 


169 


Sugreeva was pleased and said: “Do it, but be careful. Go, 
find out the truth and come back. Use all your skill. I am full of 
suspicion. They behave as if they are searching for some one. 
Could it not be that it is me they seek?” 

Taking the form of a Braahmana, Hanumaan approached 
Raama and Lakshmana. As he went and stood in front of them, 
a confident feeling possessed his heart. Straight he started speaking 
out frankly. 

Hanumaan went forward to learn the truth without discovering 
himself. But as he went on speaking, he threw all caution away 
and told in detail all about himself and the Vaartara King. 

Looking on Raama and Lakshmana, he was beside himself, 
as a devotee in the presence of the Lord, and praised them. He 
said that he was a Vaanara and had come there in disguise as desired 
by his King. 

“Royal saints,” he said: “your presence here fills my heart 
with joy. There is an aura round you as if you were gods. I take 
it, you are here in the forest for doing tapas. But why have you 
come to this inaccessible spot? Please tell me who you are. This 
river and this forest are made lovelier by your presence. Your 
faces and forms are radiantly beautiful. The creatures in the forest 
look on you with reverence and awe. Your strength and courage 
are manifest. Who are you ? From which country do you come? 
It is clear you are entitled by birth to rule some mighty kingdom 
and yet you are dressed like ascetics. With matted hair and bark 
garments you carry also bows and arrows. 

“Why are you silent? Here Sugreeva, the Vaanara King, driven 
out of his kingdom by his brother Vaali, is in hiding. He is full 
of grief. I am his minister. My name is Hanumaan. I am the son 
of Vaayu. As ordered by my king, I put on the appearance of a 
brahmachaari and am now here before you.” 

Listening to these courteous words of Hanumaan, Raama said 
to Lakshmana ; ^ ;“Brother, this speech of Hanumaan has inspired 
me with confidence. I trust him absolutely. Did you notice the 
beauty of his language and how correct and rhythmic his enun¬ 
ciation is? He speaks like one who has mastered the Vedas and the 
science of grammar. An ideal messenger he is. Fortunate is the 
king who has such a messenger. He whom we are searching for is 
himself in search of us. We came here to see Sugreeva and he has 
sent this messenger to us. Let us welcome him.” 

Then they began to talk freely to one another* Raama and 
Lakshmana on the one hand and Hanumaan on the other related 
their history, their joys and sorrows, hopes and fears. 



170 


RAAMAAYANA 


As a result of this talk, Lakshmana conceived a great affection 
for Hanumaan. 

He said to Hanumaan: “My brother, bom to great wealth, the 
eldest son of an emperor, has left his kingdom and come to the 
forest. Here his wife, dearer to him than life itself, was abducted 
by Raavana, who had by a fraudulent trick inveigled us far away 
from the hermitage where she was. We seek Sugreeva’s help to 
rescue her and recover her, for a daitya , who under a curse took 
on the form of a Raakshasa , told us, ‘If you secure the help of 
Sugreeva the Vaanara King, you will regain the princess stolen by 
the Raakshasa .* And so we are here. We seek the friendship of 
your king.” 

Hanumaan answered : “Sugreeva too has been persecuted by 
Vaali and deprived of his kingdom and his wife. It is now certain 
that he will regain both. My king will gain much by your friend¬ 
ship and with his help you will also succeed in your efforts.” 

Then the three went to Sugreeva. The way was such that only 
a Vaanara could traverse it. Hanumaan resumed his natural shape 
and carried both the princes on his back. 

The hearts of good men meet and instantly come together. As 
the Kural says, the spontaneous mutual attraction of two hearts 
and not long acquaintance creates friendship and this friendship 
was part of the divine dispensation. It was pre-destined that Hanu- 
maan’s sublime devotion should be at Raama’s service for the fulfil¬ 
ment of the purpose of the incarnation—and so there was acceptance 
at first sight. 

His carrying the two princes on his shoulder was an outward 
symbol of inward union. As friends and lovers embrace each other, 
Hanumaan, the loving servant, rejoiced in carrying his Lord on his 
shoulders. 

Ascending the Malaya hill, Hanumaan went in advance to 
Sugreeva and, announcing the visit of Raama and Lakshmana 
said : 

“Raama is a prince full of wisdom and virtue. He is the eldest 
son of the famous Emperor Dasaratha. To fulfil his father’s pro¬ 
mise, he left Ayodhya with his brother and wife and came to the 
forest. King Dasaratha was compelled by his younger wife, in 
fulfilment of an undefined promise given long ago, to banish Raama. 
In the forest, taking advantage of the princes’ absence, Raavana 
carried away the wife of Raama. Raama has come here, seeking 
your help in finding her. The princes are worthy of your friendship. 
You too will gain greatly from friendship with such heroes,” 

Sugreeva assumed the form of a handsome man and had « 



LEFT EYELIDS THROB 


171 


long and heart-to-heart talk with the princes. Stretching forth his 
hand to Raama, he said: 

“Princes, if you care for the friendship of a Vaanara , here is 
my hand, accept it. Hanumaan has told me all about your virtue 
and greatness.” 

Raama clasped his hand and embraced him. 

Soon Hanumaan got together some faggots ai\d kindled a fire. 
Circumambulating the flames Raama and Sugreeva swore mutual 
friendship: “Let us share our joys and sorrows.” They vowed: 
“Let our friendship be eternal.” 

They cut down the branch of a tree and sitting on it, Raama 
and Sugreeva were engaged in cheerful talk and so, too, were Hanu¬ 
maan and Lakshmana seated on another. 

Sugreeva narrated the story of his life—how greatly he and 
his elder brother, the mighty Vaali, were once devoted to one ano¬ 
ther, and how malignant fate had through no fault of Sugreeva’s 
made deadly enemies of them. It had come about this way. Once 
a Raakshasa named Maayaavi came at midnight to the gate of Kish- 
kindha their capital and vauntingly challenged Vaali to instant 
combat in pursuance of an ancient feud. Vaali, who never refused a 
fight, rushed forth impetuously, followed by Sugreeva; and seeing 
them, the Raakshasa fled. Pursuing him they saw him disappear 
into a great cave the mouth of which was overgrown with brushwood. 
Vaali bade Sugreeva—exacting an oath from him—to wait 
at the entrance ftar him and plunged into the darkness of the 
cave after the foe. Sugreeva waited long, but no Vaali came and 
as he stood racked with doubt, indistinct shouts and groans, which 
seemed to his horror-struck ears his brother’s, issued from the cave 
and presently there gushed out of it foaming blood which made 
him sure that Vaali had perished in the struggle. To make sure 
that the victorious Raakshasa would not rush out in the elation of 
triumph and destroy Kishkindha, Sugreeva blocked the entrance 
of the cave with a huge rock and returned to Kishkindha with his 
tale of VaaRvft death. As a rulerless state invites disaster, he was 
persuaded % the ministers and elders to occupy the vacant throne. 
While he was enjoying the sweets of power, like a bolt from the 
blue, Vaali buiw|>» them, haggard with wrath and wounds, and 
accusing him of treason and unnatural conduct towards one who 
was at once his brother and his king, drove him out with scorn 
and contumely as a wretch too vile to live, but whom he forbore 
to slay only because he was unfortunately also his brother. So 
by a cruel fate he had been deprived of his home, throne, and all, 
including even his wife, and had to seek asylum in the forest with 



172 


RAAMAAYANA 


a few faithful friends. Here at least he was safe, for Vaali had been 
forbidden by a rishi from entering the precincts on pain of instant 
death. 

This incident between Vaali and Sugreeva is a good example 
of the moral, teaching conveyed in the Puraanas. There was nothing 
terribly wrong in the conduct either of Vaali or of Sugreeva. Anger 
confuses the mind. One who yields to anger loses the capacity to 
see the truth. That way lies destruction. Vaali’s anger led to his 
end. Sugreeva humbly confessed the truth, but Vaali would not 
listen. He was beside himself with rage. Sugreeva too, was guilty 
of imprudent haste. He concluded too quickly that his brother had 
died. He was afraid that the Asura who was victorious would came 
out and kill him also; so he closed the entrance of the cave and 
returned home. At first he was not keen on becoming king and yet 
he allowed himself to be persuaded by the people. He yielded to a 
sub-conscious desire without sufficient thought. So difficulties came 
upon him. Thoughtless action leads to unhappiness. This is what 
we learn from the story of Sugreeva. 

One should not desire what belongs to another. One has to 
exercise great care, and control one’s desires. In contrast to Sug¬ 
reeva, when the ministers and subjects in Ayodhya pressed Bharata 
to accept the crown, he was firm in his refusal. Bharata’s strength 
of character was great. But Sugreeva was different. He was weak, 
and suffered in consequence. Bharata had the courage to refuse and 
his name lives for ever. 

In every episode of the Raamaayana some lesson which we 
should learn for our daily life is taught. The meaning is in some 
places plain; in others it may lie hidden. If we read with reverence 
and think deeply, we can always see the moral. 

Sugreeva concluded his story with a piteous appeal to Raama. 
“For fear of Vaali I am a wanderer in the forest. I live concealing 
myself here. Could you, will you, kill Vaali and restore to me my 
kingdom and my wife?” 

Raama answered: “Certainly I will. Vaali cannot escape this 
bow. Be assured.” 

As Sugreeva and Raama were talking thus, in the Asoka grove 
far away, the left eyelids of Seeta throbbed, which is a good omen , 
for women. At the same time, the left eyelids of the Raakshasa 
king also throbbed as an evil sign. 



CHAPTER XL1 


HE SEES HER JEWELS 

Then Sugreeva heard the story of the calamity that had befallen 
the Raghu princes at Panchavati and how Raama’s heart was> 
breaking with the ache of separation from Seeta and anxiety as to 
her fate. Deeply touched, Sugreeva, tried to console Raama. “I 
have heard everything from Lakshmana,” he said: “Lay aside all 
doubts and fears. We shall surely discover Seeta, wherever she may 
be concealed, and that, soon. 

“My companions and myself noticed a Raakshasa carrying a 
weeping lady and speeding fast across the sky. She was crying ‘Q 
Raama! O Lakshmana!’ 

“She too noticed us and, removing her sash, tied up in it her 
jewels and threw down the little bundle. We picked it up and have 
kept it. See if the jewels are Seeta’s.” 

On hearing this Raama excitedly shouted, “Fetch the bundle, 
fetch it.” 

They brought it from the cave and when Raama saw the sash 
he was beside himself with grief. The little bundle brought before 
his eyes the sufferings of Seeta at the hands of the Raakshasa . 

He closed his eyes and told Lakshmana to untie the bundle 
and examine the jewels since he himself could not bear to look 
at them. 

Lakshmana did so. “Indeed these are Seeta’s anklets,’’ Lak¬ 
shmana said. “There is no doubt they are hers. These I know, for 
often have I seen them while laying my head on her feet in worship. 
The others I am not familiar with, never having presumed to look 
closely at them.’’ 

How full of loving reverence is this speech which Vaalmeeki 
puts in the mouth of Lakshmana and how cruelly must Seeta’s 
unjust word$ have pierced his heart on the fateful day when she 
drove him from her 1 

Raama took 4 all the jewels in his hands and pressed them one 
by one to his He said: “They must have fallen on the soft 
grass and so thtyipre intact.” 

Then, grief giving place to rage, he said: “Yama’s gates are 
wide open to receive the Raakshasa . Soon will he be destroyed 
with all his people.” 

Seeing Raama’s grief and wrath, Sugreeva became somewhat 
anxious. Though their mutual friendship and help had been pledged 



174 


RAAMAAYANA 


in the presence of the sacred fire, Sugreeva was concerned over the 
Question of priorities. 

Sugreeva’s heart went to Raama in his suffering—indeed, he 
himself knew what it was to lose kingdom and wife—but then, first 
things must come first. He must approach the subject guardedly 
and not seem to place his own affairs before Raama’s. That might 
jeopardise their new-born friendship. But it was not purely selfish 
to say that he, as King of Kishkindha and lord of his tribe, would 
be a far more serviceable ally than he could be as a fugitive pretender. 
Besides, if he launched on the enterprise of reclaiming Seeta when 
Vaali was still king of the Vaanaras , one could not guess what Vaali’s 
course may be. Oh no! There could be no doubt that the first 
move in the enterprise must be to secure the resources of the Vaanara 
kingdom by killing Vaali and placing himself on the throne. 

This alone would bring success to Raama as well as himself. 
But realising Raama’s state of mind, he resolved to act with cir¬ 
cumspection. 

He said: “I do not know the strength or the dwelling place 
of this wicked Raakshasa . We^ do not know where he has taken 
Seeta and where he keeps her hidden. Still, I promise you solemn¬ 
ly, wherever Seeta may be, I shall find her and her captor and find 
ways of destroying him and recovering her. You will kill the wicked 
Raakshasa and win glory. Do not despair or yield to grief that 
weakens the spirit. Look at me. Like you, I have lost my wife; 

I have been turned out of my kingdom and disgraced. And yet I 
control my sorrow and keep my courage up. If 1, a Vaanara , can do 
this, it should be far easier for you. If sorrow overwhelms, one be¬ 
comes helpless and can do nothing. Therefore, friend, I beg of you 
* to control your grief.” 

These words of Sugreeva made an impression on Raama’s 
heart. He wiped the tears off his eyes and embraced Sugreeva. He 
got over the weakness that possessed him at the sight of Seeta’s 
jewels and recovered his fortitude and self-control. 

‘‘Sugreeva, your friendship is dear to me,” he said. “I shall 
follow your advice. Think out when and how we should begin the 
search for Seeta. I shall make your cause mine*and place you on 
the throne of Kishkindha and I, who say this, have never uttered 
a vain of false word in my life and never will Tell me frankly how 
I can bring you relief. I shall do it.” 

Sugreeva and his ministers were overjoyed to hear Raama’s 
words. They were convinced that soon their troubles would end and 
Sugreeva would once again become king of the Vaanaras . 



CHAPTER XLI1 


SUGREEVA’S DOUBTS CLEARED 

Sugreeva was keen on regaining his kingdom and family but he 
could not see how this was to be. Vaali’s strength stood as an im¬ 
passable barrier between him and the fulfilment of his desire. 

Hanumaan, his minister, tried to convince him that he would 
succeed with Raama’s help, but Sugreeva’s doubts persisted. Could 
Raama’s strength overcome Vaali’s? It all looked hopelessly im¬ 
possible. Vaali’s body was like steel. How was Raama going to 
kill him? 

Sugreeva had these doubts about Raama. But he had none 
else to help him. And he was not prepared to give up his desire. 
He decided to test Raama’s strength. 

But how is one to subject a friend to a test without discour¬ 
teously betraying one’s suspicion? Raama had promised to get the 
thing done. How was an occasion to be created to measure his 
ability? Sugreeva thought long and formed a plan. 

He told Raama softly: “My Lord Raama! Your words have 
banished sorrow from my heart. I know your valour. An arrow 
from your bow can destroy the three worlds. How can Vaali!a 
frame stand against it? Still it is my duty to tell you all about Vaali’s 
strength. He can go round to the four oceans to take up in his palm 
and sip the water with the morning prayers. He can toss and play 
with a heavy rock as if it were a ball. He can pull out mighty forest 
trees as if they were blades of grass. Once Dundubhi, an Asura 
in buffalo form possessing the strength of a thousand elephants, 
challenged Ocean to a fight. Ocean evaded saying: ‘You should 
fight with an equal. There in the north stands Himavaan. Go 
and challenge him. Leave poor me alone.* Dundubhi agreed 
and, speeding northwards, met and challenged Himavaan, goring 
his rocky side with his horns. Himavaan controlled his temper and 
said: ‘Why do you assault me? I am not a fighter. I spend my 
life in the company of sages who love to stay with me.* Dundubhi 
answered: ‘Very well, then. But tell me of some one I can fight 
with. I want a worthy foeman today.’ 

“ Himavaan said : 4 There is one is one in the south who is a foe 
worthy of you. He is Vaali, the Vaanara King, His strength is like 
his father Indra’s. If you care, you may go to him and challenge 
him to fight.’ 

“ Dundubhi went straight to Vaali’s place and raised a loud 
uproar at the entrance of Kishkindha. He tore up trees and pulled 



176 


RAAMAAYANA 


down the gate and roared, “ Come out and prove your strength in a 
fight with me.’ 

“ Vaali was then resting with his queen. On hearing the chal¬ 
lenge he came out accompanied by the women of his palace. ‘ Why, 
O Dundubhi, do you raise this clamour at my city gate ?’ he asked. 
4 Are you tired of life ?’ 

“ Vaali’s scornful address enraged the Asura who said : ‘ Don’t 
boast of your strength in the presence of your admiring women. I 
have come here for a fight with you. If you have any manliness in 
you, come out and show it. You will say you are too drunk now to 
fight ; but I am willing to wait till you become sober. If you like, 
you may spend the night in your pleasures and bid a tearful leave 
of all your dear ones and come to me in the morning to be slain by 
me.’ 

“ Vaali laughed at Dundubhi’s words and said : ‘ My dear 

women, go inside. O Asura, I am not the worse for drink and if you 
want a fight, there is no time like the present. Have at you !’ So 
saying and with a laugh he took hold of the Asura by his tail and 
whirled him round and flung him. Dundubhi spat blood and fell 
on the ground. 

“ After a while the Asura rose again and a great battle followed. 
Vaali, son of Indra, pounded the Asura to death. And he flung the 
dead buffalo so that it fell on the ground at the distance of a yojana . 

“ Drops of blood from the Asura’s body were carried by the 
wind and fell on the aashrama of Matanga. The sage was wroth 
and soon found out who was responsible for this contamination. He 
saw at once that Vaali in his pride had flung a bleeding carcass and 
desecrated the holy spot. The sage pronounced a curse, ‘ If this 
Vaali enters the precincts of this aashrama , he will lose his life.* That 
is why, O Raama, with my friends I am living here in safety. Vaali 
dare not approach this place for fear of the curse. Look at these 
sal trees. He can pluck one of them and just shake all the leaves 
off as one dusts a jacket. Such is his strength. How could I, having 
incurred this terrible brother’s enmity, feel secure ?” 

Lakshmana understood that Sugreeva needed a demonstration 
of Raama’s prowess to give him confidence and he said : “ How 
would you like Raama to show you his confidence to conquer Vaali ?” 

Sugreeva answered : “ Indeed, I have no doubts. I know 
Raama’s prowess though now it is hidden as embers in ashes. I have 
sought refuge under him. And yet, when I recall Vaali’s mighty 
deeds, I tremble. That is all.” 

Seeing Sugreeva’s faith in him and his great fear of Vaali, Raama 
resolved to put an end to his doubts. By a playful flip of his toe 



sugreeva’s doubts cleared 


177 


he sent the enormous skeleton of Dundubhi which was lying there, 
flying in the air to a distance of ten yojanas . But Sugreeva though 
impressed was not convinced. “ When my brother sent Dundubhi’s 
carcass hurtling in the sky, it was full of flesh and blood and far heavier 
than this weather-beaten skeleton,” he said. 

Then Raama bent his bow and, pulling the string to his ear, 
sent forth an arrow. It pierced the sal tree pointed out by Sugreeva 
and six other trees standing behind it. Piercing the seven trees the 
beautiful arrow touched the earth and returned to Raama’s quiver. 

Sugreeva, seeing this, was beside himself with joy. He was 
now certain that Raama’s arrow could pierce the adamant frame of 
Vaali. He fell prostrate before Raama and said : “ With my own 

eyes I have now seen your prowess. Even if all the gods with Indra at 
their head should come and oppose you, your victory is certain. Why 
then talk of Vaali ? I have gained your friendship and I have no 
more use for fear or grief. Slay Vaali and save me. Let us go to 
Kishkindha today.” 

Both Raama and Lakshmana agreed. They talked how to set 
about and it was finally agreed that Surgeeva should appear in Kishkin¬ 
dha and challenge Vaali to single combat. Vaali was sure to come 
out, and as the brothers were fighting, Raama would kill Vaali with 
an arrow. They proceeded to Kishkindha. Sugreeva went ahead. 
Raama followed him and stood away behind a tree in the dense forest. 

Sugreeva shouted. Vaali heard the shout and in great rage 
emerged from the fortress, radiant like the morning sun. 

The two brothers fought each other fiercely. 

But Raama, who was standing bow in hand behind a tree was 
bewildered. As they wrestled together the brothers were so similar 
in form and feature, in equipment and method of fighting, that Raama 
could not distinguish Vaali from Sugreeva and was afraid to shoot 
lest he kill the wrong combatant. 

Meantime Sugreeva, having the worst of the fight, broke from 
his brother’s grip with a desperate effort and, wounded and weary, 
disappointed and despondent, fled for life and reached Rishyamooka 
forest. 

Even this he was able to do because Vaali did not wish to slay 
him and was not unwilling to give his brother another lease of life. 

Raama and Lakshmana rejoined the woebegone Sugreeva. He 
looked down at the ground without lifting his eyes. He was angry 
that Raama had broken his word and failed to help him. 

44 If you did not like to kill Vaali,” said Sugreeva, “ you could 
have told me so earlier. In that case, I, who know Vaali’s might 
would never have challenged him to fight. On the contrary, you 



178 


RAAMAAYANA 


made me believe you, and I have had such a drubbing that it is a 
wonder I am alive.” 

“ Do not be angry, Sugreeva, but listen,” said Raama. “ There 
was a good reason why 1 could not send forth my deadly arrow. 
You and Vaali were alike in height and girth, in gait and shouts, in 
dress and ornaments. Once the fight began, I could not tell yom 
from Vaali. And I stood bewildered and helpless. It would have 
been terrible if I killed you instead of Vaali. Do not be angry. 
Challenge Vaali once again. This time I shall surely slay him. Here, 
Lakshmana, fetch that flowering creeper. Tie it round Sugreeva’s 
neck as a garland. I shall then know who is our friend and who is 
Vaali as they fight. Now, Sugreeva, you shall see Vaali rolling on 
the ground.” 

Sugreeva was satisfied. His spirits recovered. Lakshmana tied 
the creeper round his neck. Once again, and handsomer than ever,. 
Sugreeva proceeded to Kishkindha. And Raama and Lakshmana. 
followed him as before. 


CHAPTER XLm 

THE SLAYING OF VAALI 

Evening was approaching. Once more Sugreeva roared at the gate 
of Kishkindha and challenged Vaali to fight. 

Vaali who was then resting happily was startled and for a moment 
paled with puzzled concern, but was presently overwhelmed with 
rage and sprung up stamping the earth as though he would split it. 

Taara his queen, her heart full of loving fear, held him in her 
arms in a close embrace and tried to restrain his impetuosity with 
affectionate counsel. “ Put away this wrath, my dear lord, as one 
puts away a used garland, for you have had enough fighting today. 
Tomorrow would do as well for another battle, for you lack neither 
enemies nor valour. I pray you not to rush out on the instant. It 
seems to me you should think calmly before going out now to meet 
your brother. I am afraid there is a deep game. Your brother was 
defeated and disgraced and ran for dear life and concealed himself 
for safety. Now he has returned and raises this noise. Your brother 
is not such a fool as to challenge you again so soon after the punish¬ 
ment you inflicted on him unless he was assured of help and protection 
from an invincible ally of tried prowess. Did you not observe that 
his very roar of challenge had a new note of confidence in it ? I shall 
tell you what I heard from Angada who had it from our scouts who 



THE SLAYING OF VAALI 


179 


cange the forests. Two princes of unrivalled valour, Raama and 
Lakshmana, have come from Ayodhya and Sugreeva has secured the 
promise of their assistance. After all, my lord, your brother is 
virtuous and brave. Why should you hate him ? Who in the world 
is closer to us than he ? He will be your devoted servant and strong 
ally. It is best to forget the past and make it up with Sugreeva. 
My dear lord, listen to my words !” 

Vaali disliked this advice. Anger clouded his intellect. Caught 
and dragged by the noose of death, he could not see reason and only 
became more fixed in his resolve. 

Taara, bright and beautiful as became her name taara , meaning 
star, spoke in vain. 

“ What are you saying ?” he said. “ Am I to bear in silence the 
Tinging challenge of this enemy-brother ? When a foe calls to battle, 
is a warrior to hang back ? Death would be better than such cowar¬ 
dice. Don’t you worry about Raama. He knows dharma ; he is 
one brought up in the fear of sin. Oh, let me alone, will you ? I may 
tell you 1 shall not kill Sugreeva—only I will teach the presumptuous 
fellow a lesson he won’t forget and let him go. Let me go, I tell you. 
You have spoken out of the fullness of your love for me. I shall 
humble Sugreeva and send him back and return soon with victory. 
Have no fear for me.” 

Thus Vaalmeeki pictures Vaali—his chivalry, his dauntless and 
impatient valour, his tenderness. It is true Vaalmeeki’s hero has to 
kill the Vaanara king—the epic requires it—but the slain warrior 
was a noble knight, worthy of the reader’s admiration and tears. 

Taara, with tears in her eyes, circumambulated him and praying 
for his success, returned to her apartment full of grave apprehension. 
Leaving Taara and her companions behind, Vaali issued from the 
fort hissing like an angry cobra and went to meet Sugreeva. 

As he saw him standing there, radiant and courageous, he girt 
his loins and sprang on him. And Sugreeva too ran forward to 
meet Vaali. 

” If you love your life,” warned Vaali, “ run away. Do not fall 
a victim to this fist of mine !” 

Sugreeva retorted angrily and the battle began. Fierce with 
remembered wrongs and keyed up above himself by the certainty of 
Raama’s help, Sugreeva maintained for long and equal combat, but 
presently Vaaii’s greater might began to prevail and Sugreeva was in 
such obvious distress that Raama who was watching with ready bow 
knew he could not hold out much longer. It was now or never and 
placing a deadly arrow on the string and pulling it to his ear, Raama 
sped it at Vaali’s mighty chest. Pierced by that irresistible shaft 



180 


RAAMAAYANa 


Vaali crashed down as falls a great forest tree cut asunder by the 
woodman’s axe and lay stretched on the ground empurpled with blood 
as lies the festival flag-staff pulled down when the festival is ended. 

Even so, he was radiantly handsome, his noble figure shining 
like a cloud lit up by the setting sun. The divine necklace given to 
him by Indra shone on his breast, which guarded his life and fortune. 
This jewel, Raama’s dart, the bleeding wound, all added lustre to 
his mighty body. 

Vaalmeeki describes beautifully the majestic appearance of the 
fallen hero. A true warrior is never so beautiful as when he lies 
dying on the field of battle. 

Astounded at being hit and laid low, when he least expected it, 
from an unknown quarter, Vaali looked round in perplexed surprise, 
and saw Raama and Lakshmana approaching him bow in hand. 
With tears of indignant wrath, and in a voice faint with approaching 
dissolution, he accused them of ignoble perfidy in dealing causeless 
death to a person engaged in combat wi{h another. 

“ Raama,” he said : “ you are the son of Emperor Dasaratha. 
Born of a noble race and famous by your own exploits, how did you 
bring yourself to do this deed ? The world is full of praises for your 
valour and virtue. And yet, while I was absorbed in a battle with 
another, you came unseen and, from behind, shot a fatal arrow at me. 
How false and undeserved is your reputation for manly virtue, for 
truth and forbearance ! What will the world think of you now? 
What harm have I ever done to you ? Did I come out to fight with 
you ? You have killed me like an assassin, concealing yourself 
behind the trees. For a royal prince to kill an innocent person in 
this way is grievous sin. You are unworthy for kingship. The 
goddess Earth will never consent to take you for a bridegroom. My 
greatest sorrow is that I am killed by a base and sinful wretch. If it 
was battle with me you wanted, I would have given it to you, and 
slain by me in fair combat you might have been lying in the dust as 
1 do now. 

“ Or if it was help to recover your Seeta I would have won her 
back for you in a day. I would have killed Raavana and dragged 
his body with a rope round the neck and placed it at your feet. No 
matter where he has hidden Seeta, I would have discovered her and 
restored her to you. 

“ All who are born must die. This is the law. I do not there¬ 
fore grieve for my death. Still, your sin is great in killing me in this 
treacherous way.” 

Thus Vaali, son of Indra, reproached Raama with his dying 
breath. And all this is fully set out by Vaalmeeki, the divine poet* 



THE SLAYING OF VAAL1 


m 


as well as by Kamban. Against this accusation what defence could 
Raama offer ? Vaalmeeki has it that Raama gave some explanation 
with which Vaali was satisfied. But I am omitting all this as pointless 
and pray that the learned may forgive me. What I think is that an 
avataar is an avataar and that among the sorrows that the Lord and 
His consort had to endure in their earthly incarnation, this liability 
to have their actions weighed on the earthly scales is a part. 

Vaali bruised and bleeding from the many wounds of his fight 
with Sugreeva, lay in the throes of death. He lived just long enough 
to see his queen and his beloved son Angada—poor bewildered lad, 
who at his mother’s bidding 4 to fall at the feet of his father who was 
going on a long long journey ’ prostrated himself in silence, too 
stunned to realise the extent of his loss. This will be narrated later. 
Vaali’s words were addressed to Raama. 

44 All is over, I shall blame you no more. My dear, dear son 
Angada is orphaned. You and Sugreeva should look after him. 
I entrust him to you. Look after him ; it is your duty to see that he 
does not pine away like a withering lotus-plant in a dried-up tank. 
Tell Sugreeva that he should not imagine that it was Taara who set 
me up against him. Ask him to treat Angada as he should treat a 
prince, with honour and affection. Do this for me. I want no more. 
The warrior’s Heaven is calling me !” 

So ended Vaali’s life. 

Owing to the protective virtue of Indra’s necklace, Raama 
could not have met Vaali face to face and vanquished him, just as 
Raavana could not be conquered by the gods. Raama could kill 
Vaali only when himself unseen. And still the question stands, why 
should Vaali have been killed at all ? 

Perhaps the answer is to be found in what Kabandha said to 
Raama in gratitude for being released from his curse. 44 Through 
Sugreeva’s friendship you will recover Seeta”—Sugreeva’s help, not 
Vaali’s. And so Raama went in search of Sugreeva, found him and 
pledged his friendship and consecrated it by fire. Sugreeva had 
committed no unforgivable offence against Vaali; yet Vaali, with 
his supernatural strength, persecuted his brother. Hearing the 
latter’s complaint, Raama had pledged his word to kill Vaali and 
restore to Sugreeva his wife and make him king as his part of the 
contract of alliance. Thereafter, Raama had no alternative. To 
kill Vaali from cover became an inevitable necessity. , 

Raama erred in running after the magic deer to please his wife. 
Consequent on this, difficulties and sorrows and conflicts of duty 
pursued him. If we keep in mind that when God takes a lower 
and limited form by His own ordinance, limitations foUow and we 



182 


RAAMAAYANA 


should not be confused thereby. This is my humble view as against 
other explanations propounded by the pious. 


CHAPTER XUV 

TAARA’S GRIEF 

There was panic in Kishkindha when the news came that Vaalli had 
been slain by an archer, and the Vaanaras fled hither and thither in 
hopeless confusion. Taara, seeing this, laid aside her own grief and 
like a queen put courage in her husband’s subjects saying: “Till this 
day you walked before the King to battle! Why then do you flee in fear 
now? There is no danger for you. Raama killed Vaali only to make 
Sugreeva king. Your lives are in no danger; you will only have a 
different ruler; that is all. You need not fly or fear.” 

When she tried to go to the spot where her husband lay dead, the 
Vaanaras stopped her saying: “We shall crown Angada king and we 
shall make safe the fortress. We shall defend the town against Su¬ 
greeva and his allies.” 

But she said: “Now my noble lord is dead, nothing matters.” 
And boldly she went straight to where Raama and Lakshmana were 
standing. 

When she saw her husband lying wounded to death she could not 
control her sorrow; she sobbed and cried. 

“Ah my hero! ” she wept, embracing the wounded Vaali. “How 
many heroes have you laid low and now you lie low yourself! And 
you have left me here!” 

Soon Vaalli’s son Angada reached the spot. And Sugreeva, 
witnessing this scene, was filled with remorse at the thought that it was 
all for him that this calamity had happened. The remorse was no 
doubt genuine, for invariably revenge—especially revenge wreaked 
on those who have been friends in other days—brings nothing but 
bitterness and grief, and the momentary feeling of triumph is all ashes 
to the taste. How few of us realise this in the confusion created by 
desires and anger! 

Taara rolled on the ground and lamented: “Leaving dear Angada 
an orphan and^nyself a helpless destitute you have gone on the journey 
from which there is no return. My Lord! My hero!” 

Hanumaan tried to console her: “The dead reach their places 
in heaven. Why lament for Vaali? Angada will be crowned in due 
course and we shall then rejoice. It is our duty to look after Angada. 
Let us now think of performing Vaali’s obsequies.” 



taara’s grief 


183 


“I care for nothing,” answered Taara. “It is for Sugreeva to, 
perform the obsequies and to look after Angada. What is there for 
me to do? Can a thousand Angadas, equal in my eyes, my husband? 
With him I shall enter the house of Yama. That alone will please me.” 

Vaali, unconscious till now, opened his eyes for the last time and 
addressing Sugreeva said: “Brother, we two could have been friends 
and reigned happily over the kingdom; but it was not given to us to 
be so wise and happy. I am more to blame than you, but why talk 
about that now? Hereafter you shall rule the kingdom. I have en¬ 
trusted to you Angada, my son, dearer than life itself to Taara and me.. 
He is a warrior equal to you in prowess. Be a father to him and look 
after him with kindness. This is my only request to you. And bo 
kind to Taara who was not only a blameless and affectionate wife, 
but also a very wise and far-sighted counsellor. Whatever she fore¬ 
tells is bound to happen. Do not disregard her advice on any matter. 
Here, take the necklace that lndra gave me and take with it its secret 
power. My life is over and so is my resentment. May you be happy !’ 
Thus the generous Vaali blessed his brother Sugreeva. 

He gave good advice to Angada: “Sugreeva is now your king, 
Be loyal to him and give him patient, affectionate service.” 

Like a flowering creeper embracing a forest tree felled down by 
an axe, Taara lay on the ground clinging to Vaali. 

Neela, as gently as he could, drew out the dart from Vaali’s chest. 
Blood gushed out of the wound and spread into a pool. Vaali’s 
life left his body. Taara lamented loudly. “For the last time salute 
your father,” she bade Angada in heart-broken accents. “O my 
husband! your dear son is bowing before you. Will you not say a 
word to him? Alas! I am a widow and he is an orphan.” 

The sight of all this struck Sugreeva to the heart. He said to 
himself: “Moved by desire I closed the entrance of the cave and 
leaving Vaali there, I seized and enjoyed his wealth. What a sinner 
I have been!” 

It may be that in his penitent mood Sugreeva accused himself 
wrongly, but it is also true that without our knowledge, desire cor¬ 
rupts our mind and leads us to wrong actions and entangles us in sin. 
Sugreeva felt that desire had unknowingly blinded and betrayed him. 

Kaama in ^Sanskrit stands for lust and greed and every kind of 
desire. Kaama is man’s internal foe which he has to vanquish. 
This is the lesson taught in the last seven slokas of the third chapter 
of the Gita. Sri Krishna concludes his exhortation with these words: 
Jahi Satrum Kaamaroopam Duraasadam. 

If desire corrupted Sugreeva’s mind, anger corrupted Vaali’s.. 
When Vaali saw that Sugreeva had barred the entrance and left him* 



184 


RAAMAAYANA 


shut up in the cave he felt convinced that Sugreeva had accompanied 
him in his pursuit of the Raakshasa not as a brother but with a trea¬ 
cherous motive. He concluded that Sugreeva had planned to sacri¬ 
fice him to the Asura and usurp his place. 

He became a prey to his own fury. He disgraced and drove out 
his blood-brother and nursed his anger. Anger ( krodha , as it is 
called in Sanskrit) betrayed Vaali into sin. 

Indeed kaama and krodha are the ultimate cause of all sin. Un¬ 
less we defend our heart against these foes and keep them out, we 
cannot escape sin. 

Sugreeva lamented: “Though my sin was great, he would not 
kill me. He drove me out and allowed me to escape with life. That 
was all. But I conspired to slay him and succeeded. There is no 
sinner like me in the world and yet with his last breath he gave me the 
kingdom to rule ancTgave, too, the gift of Indra, the necklace of power. 
Indeed he was noble. Why should I still cling to this base life, I, 
who brought about the death of my heroic brother?” 

At least once a year, men that follow ancient custom utter the 
prayer Kaamokaarsheet manyurakaarsheet. That is, ‘Desire lured me 
into sin, anger lured me into sin.’ So saying many times with humble 
penitence, they seek to cleanse their hearts. This is a practice that all 
should follow, to repent and purify the heart and surrender it to the 
Lord, Kaamokaarsheet many urakaar sheet, Naaraayanaaya namah. 

With fear and hesitation, Raama gently approached the weep¬ 
ing Taara. But there was no sign of anger on her face. The words 
she addressed to the slayer of her husband were worthy of a hero’s 
queen. “With the weapon with which, O warrior, you killed my 
husband, kill me too and enable me to join him. Even in heaven, 
he will not be happy without me. Do not fear it would be a sin. It 
will be a meritorious act to unite husband and wife. This will cleanse 
your sin, your treacherous slaying of my husband.” 

Vaalmeeki says at this stage that Taara knew the truth of Raama’s 
incarnation and saw Vishnu in him. The traditional belief is that, 
like Sumitra—-the mother of Lakshmana, Taara—the wife of Vaali— 
was a jnaani , a knower of Reality. Though at first she hated 
Raama for his treachery, yet when she saw him face to face she saw 
his divinity, so it is said. 

Those who read the Raamaayana as a mere tale would find all 
this pointless. But to the followers of bhakti maarga , this will not 
sound improbable. Tulasidaas sings at this point that Siva explains 
to Paarvati: “Look, Uma, how Raama—the Supreme Being— 
moves all creatures like puppets tied to strings!” Bhakti is needed to 
realise the full meaning of ancient mythology. 



ANGER AND RECONCILIATION 


185 


Even on a rational basis, Taara comes out as a diplomat, an 
expert in statesmanship. She had the intelligence to anticipate com¬ 
ing events. What had happened had happened. By his address and 
good fortune, Sugreeva had secured the alliance of Raama; Vaali 
was no more; Angada’s welfare was all that she should care for here¬ 
after. Could Angada afford to antagonise Sugreeva with Raama 
and Lakshmana ready to support him bow in hand? Peace, not war, 
was indicated. 

Hence, when she concealed her anger from Raama and put on 
an appearance of patient submission to events, she was really securing 
the best interests of Angada and winning for him the compassion and 
sympathy of all. 

Vaali’s obsequies were performed with due form and ceremony. 
After the auspicious bath, Sugreeva was crowned king and Angada 
was made Yuvaraaja. 


CHAPTER XLV 

* 

ANGER AND RECONCILIATION 

The rainy season began. Sugreeva and his companions spent the 
time in Kishkindha in enjoyment, but Raama and Lakshmana spent 
the weary days waiting in a cave nearby. The forest paths were flooded 
and became rushing torrents, impossible to traverse. The search for 
Seeta, therefore, had to be suspended. Raama brooded over Seeta’s 
predicament and was plunged in sorrow. Lakshmana counselled 
him to bear with the delay till the rainy season ended. And Raama 
held his soul in patience. 

The edge of* the keenest sorrow wears with time and perhaps 
Heaven’s kindest gifts to men are sleep for the fleeting cares of the 
day and forgetfulness for the deep-seated injuries of the heart. Kish¬ 
kindha mourned her Vaali for a time, and then rejoiced in Sugreeva and 
the survivors; Sugreeva forgot the privations of his exile and the re¬ 
morse for his brother’s death, and enjoyed to the full his present 
prosperity and even Taara reconciled and adapted herself to altered 
circumstances in the interests of her son. The royal palace of Kish¬ 
kindha was full of joy and wassail and the gloomy months of rain 
which the Raghu brothers spent in leaden-footed repining, sped with 
golden-winged enjoyment for Sugreeva and his household. Only 
Hanumaan felt anxious. *He could not forget Raama’s business. He 
was looking out for an opportunity to remind the king of his pledge 
to Raama. 



186 


RAAMAAYANA 


At last, the rains ceased and the sky was cleared of cloud and 
lightning. The air was sweet with the perfumes of flowers and the 
song of birds and joy came to life in the forest again. The intelligent 
and highly virtuous Hanumaan now approached his king. Sugreeva 
.had entrusted all official duties to the ministers and was absorbed in 
pleasure. Hanumaan knew that the wisest and best of men neglect 
their promises in such circumstances and addressed the king with great 
politeness: 

“You have regained the kingdom of your ancestors and are in 
•secure possession and enjoyment of it. But something yet remains to 
be done. You must fulfil your promise to your allies and so increase 
your fame and strengthen your power. Even at the sacrifice of one’s 
own interests and pleasure, one should carry out the business of one’s 
friends according to one’s promise. Only so can a king’s authority 
and reputation grow. 

“It will be best to fulfil one’s promise before the due date; in any 
case delay should be avoided. Fulfilment after the promised date 
is worse than useless. One should not wait to be reminded by one’s 
friends of what had been promised to them. All this you know with¬ 
out my telling you. Remembering what Raama has done for us, 
we must take steps to fulfil our promise without waiting to be reminded 
by him. The rainy season is over. There is no ground for further 
delay. We can no longer postpone the task of searching for Seeta. 
Raama may be very patient, but that does not justify any further delay 
-on our part. Did not Raama kill your foe promptly, not minding the 
danger or the blame involved? We should fulfil our promise with 
equal promptness.” 

Thus politely did Maaruti convey his advice to Sugreeva. The 
latter accepted it and, thanking Hanumaan, ordered Neela to mobilise 
the Vaanara army. “All the world must be searched and Seeta found,” 
he said. “Order therefore the most powerful Vaanaras to come and 
join up at once. Those who fail will be summarily punished.” Having 
said this, Sugreeva went back into his private apartments. 

Raama and Lakshmana spent the time in their cave waiting for 
the end of the rainy season and the fulfilment by Sugreeva of his pro¬ 
mise. But when the rains were over and the forest and its creatures 
shone with renewed beauty, Raama grieved intensely at the thought 
of Seeta suffering at the hands of the Raakshasas. 

“The world is full of life and joy,” said Raama. “But Seeta is 
in agony somewhere. And I sit still here, awaiting the favour of this 
ungrateful Vaanara king. Alas, she walfcpd cheerfully through the 
Dandaka forest, as if it were a palace-park; she did not mind the stony 
ground and the thorns in the path. What must be her suffering now? 



ANGER AND RECONCILIATION 


187 


But this king, drowned in his cups and revelling in the company of 
his women, has forgotten his promise to me. 

“Lakshmana! Go at once to Kishkindha and tell this base king: 
•Remember! Know that the path still yawns open whereby the slaugh¬ 
tered Vaali went to his doom. Do not follow him, but fulfil your 
promise to me. Ruin awaits him who forgets kindness and neglects 
friends. Beware of Raama’s arrows. The four months of the rainy 
season are over. These four months were like four ages to Raama, but 
to you steeped in pleasures, they have perhaps sped like minutes! 
By delay you incur Raama’s wrath and seek your destruction.’ Go, 
Lakshmana, and tell him this.” 

This was the angry and impatient message Raama wanted Laksh¬ 
mana to take to Sugreeva. 

Carrying this freight of his brother’s grief and anger, Lakshmana 
was about to leave. Then Raama thought again. He knew Laksh¬ 
mana’s nature and feared danger from his rashness. So he called 
him back and said to him: “In conveying my complaint to Sugreeva, 
do not be harsh. Whatever his faults, he is our friend. Point out 
his faults to him, but say nothing harsh.” 

Lakshmana agreed, but he found it hard to control his own anger 
as he approached the gates of Kishkindha. 

Noting the severe face of Lakshmana who was fully armed, the 
Vaanara sentry became alert and made ready to guard the fortress. 
This enraged Lakshmana still further. 

Some Vaanaras ran to the inner apartments and reported to 
Sugreeva: “Lakshmana, furious with anger, is coming here bow in 
hand. We could not stop him.” 

But the Vaanara king was tipsy and surrounded by women and 
he took no notice. The king’s servants ordered the sentry at the 
gates to stand firm and prevent the entry of any one. Lakshmana’s 
anger became quite uncontrollable. Lakshmana forced his way in. 
There he met young Angada, the thought of whose youth and mis¬ 
fortunes took away something of the edge of his wrath. “My child, 
go and tell the Vaanara king,” he said, “that Lakshmana is waiting 
at the palace gate to have audience of him on behalf of his grief- 
stricken brother.” 

Angada went accordingly to the king’s apartment and informed 
him of Lakshmana’s visit. But Sugreeva was in no condition to under¬ 
stand. Angada saw this and took counsel with the ministers as to 
what should be done. Hanumaan and some of the fellow ministers 
gently explained what was happening and Sugreeva was at last roused 
from Its tipsy condition. 

' Sugreeva said: “I am not at fault, am I? Why should my 



188 


RAAMAAYANA 


friends Raama and Lakshmana be angry with me? Some enemy must 
have carried tales and set them up against me.” 

Hanumaan answered: “It is my duty, O king, to say these things 
and I say them. Do not be angry with me. We have delayed in 
carrying out our promise to Raama. We have forgotten Raama’s 
grief. It is late, but not too late. Hence let us do quickly what we 
should. Let us seek forgiveness from Lakshmana. Let us, without 
further delay, take steps to fulfil our promise to Raama.” 

Then Sugreeva agreed -to receive Lakshmana. 

As Lakshmana went into the Vaanara town, he marvelled at its 
beauty and the culture of Kishkindha. Passing through beautiful 
streets, he stood outside the king’s palace. Hearing the sounds of 
revelry, of dance and song, proceeding from within, he saw that the 
Vaanaras had forgotten their promise and were lost in enjoyment. 
He could hardly control his anger. Still he held back from entering 
the women’s chamber and, standing in a corner, outside, he twanged 
his bow-string. The sound filled all Kishkindha with fear and tremb¬ 
ling. Sugreeva, hearing it, realised that the prince was, indeed, angry. 
He saw the danger and asked Taara to go and pacify the prince. “A 
chivalrous man like Lakshmana will find his anger slip from him when 
he speaks to a lady and it will be impossible for him to continue wrath¬ 
ful,” said the king, shrewd even in his tipsy condition. 

Taara advanced towards Lakshmana. In looks, in knowledge of 
the world and skill in speech, Taara was unrivalled. She said to 
Lakshmana: “After enduring for a long time poverty and persecution, 
Sugreeva is enjoying the pleasures and the prosperity you have secured 
for him. This enjoyment has gone to his head and he has lost his 
senses. I know his fault, but you should forgive him. The high- 
souled who know the foibles and imperfections of our common nature 
should temper their censure with compassion. So be not too harsh 
in judging of king Sugreeva’s surrender to temptations of the flesh 
—especially after his long trials and privations. But I can assure 
you, he has never lost sight of his debt or his duty to you. He has 
already issued orders for mobilising the Vaanara warriors from all 
quarters. Today or tomorrow they will all be here. Then the search 
for Seeta and the war against Raavana will begin. Have no doubts. 
And now, pray come in and see the King.” 

Lakshmana, now no longer angry, entered the apartment. Su¬ 
greeva, descending from his seat, welcomed Lakshmana. 

“Forgive my faults,” he said. “With Raama’s friendship and 
help I am King today. How can I ever forget what I owe to the 
valorous and good Raama? He can destroy his foes without any 
help from me. I, with my armies, can only follow him ; that is all. 



ANGER AND RECONCILIATION 1 $9 

Surely Raavana will perish. The search for Seeta will soon begin. 
Do forgive the delay of which I am guilty.” 

Lakshmana was pleased. “Raama is your equal in honour and 
prowess, none else,” he said. “Come with me to Rishyamooka and 
give him words of comfort in his grief.” 

Sugreeva and Lakshmana went in a litter to Raama and, ex¬ 
plaining the arrangements already made, satisfied him. 

Raama was pleased. He said: “You indeed are a real friend. 
Like the clouds yielding rain, the sun destroying darkness and the 
moon pleasing human hearts, a good friend comes to one’s help spon¬ 
taneously. I am happy in your friendship. Now the end of Raavana 
and his race is certain.” 

Even as Raama was expressing his gratitude and joy, great multi¬ 
tudes of Vaanaras under their respective leaders arrived and assembled. 
They came from distant forests, mountains and coasts. The dust 
they raised darkened the sky. Millions of monkeys and bears in a 
variety of shapes and colours were there. 

Sugreeva addressed this enormous army and showed them their 
appointed camping places. Later, he divided the host into eight 
divisions and sent each under its commander, thoroughly to search in 
the eight directions for Seeta. 

One point is worth noting here. The Tamil poet Kamban des¬ 
cribes Taara as a chaste widow living a life of discipline and privations. 
It is different in Vaalmeeki, who includes Taara and the other women 
as part of the inheritance Sugreeva won from Vaali—in fact, as an 
appurtenance of the throne. When Sugreeva lost himself in bodily 
pleasures and forgot his duty to Raama, Taara shared his 
revels and is described as being flushed and unsteady with wine 
when she went out at her lord’s command to allay Lakshmana’s 
resentment. 

In ancient times, when an elder brother died leaving a wife, there 
\vas a custom in royal and other noble families for the younger brother 
to take the widow as wife and protect her. It is difficult for people 
of one age to judge the customs of another age. Imagination and 
great flexibility of mind are needed to assess the merits and defects of 
usages with which we are not familiar. 



CHAPTER XL VI 


THE SEARCH BEGINS 

4< Look, Raama, at this Vcianara army,” said Sugreeva. “All these 
myriads, of wondrous strength, are yours to command. They are 
willing and able to do you all the service you demand. Consider this 
huge army as your own and bid them to whatever you wish.” 

Raama, beside himself with joy, embraced Sugreeva. He said: 
“First we should find out whether Seeta is alive, and if so where she 
is. Next we should know Raavana’s whereabouts. Then we shall 
do what needs to be done. But it is for you, not for me or Lakshmana, 
to command this army. You are their King. Besides, you know best 
what needs to be done and how to do it. Blessed am I to have a 
friend like you and a brother like Lakshmana!” 

Then Sugreeva issued stringent orders to his commanders at once 
to send divisions of the army to the four quarters of the earth to make^ 
a thorough search for Seeta. 

After sending away the other leaders, Sugreeva took Hanumaan 
aside and told him: “Son of Vaayu , possessing the strength and 
splendour of your father, you alone can succeed in this task. You 
have strength, courage and intelligence and on you I rely to take up 
and discharge this responsibility of discovering Seeta.” 

Raama too felt that Hanumaan’s efforts would be crowned with 
success. Whatever obstacles turned up, he felt that Hanumaan would 
find a way of overcoming them. He gave his signet-ring to Hanu¬ 
maan and said: “Take this ring. I am full of hope that you will 
discover Seeta, This ring will tell her that you are my messenger. 
Dear Hanumaan, may you bring Seeta and me together again!” 

Readers should realise the solemnity and pathos of the scene, 
Raama full of abiding trust in the devoted loyalty and valour of Hanu¬ 
maan placing the ring as though it was his own hungry heart in his 
servant’s hand and the ideal servant accepting the sacred trust with 
a deep reverence and an unshakable resolve never to fail his master. 

Surgreeva gave orders to his army. “Seeta must anyhow be 
discovered. No matter where she is hidden, you can and must find 
her. Within a month you must return with news of her.” And the 
army swarmed out like ants from an ant-hill and spread in the four 
directions. 

Satabali and his army proceeded northwards. Vinata went east, 
Sushena westwards, Hanumaan, Angada and the General Taara travel¬ 
led southwards. 

All were equally enthusiastic and equally eager to catch and kill 



THE SEARCH BEGINS 


19 ! 


Raavana and redeem Seeta. Each group was anxious to be first to 
return with success. There was tumultuous rivalry. 

Raama enquired of Sugreeva: “You describe every quarter 
and region of the earth like one who has seen the whole world with 
his own eyes. How and when did you see it all?” 

“You will remember, my Lord,” said Sugreeva, “how Vaalt 
pursued me in all directions. Wherever I went, he still pursued me. 
And so I had to wander over the face of the whole world. 1 thus had 
occasion to see every part of this planet. Later, I learnt about the 
spot where Rishi Matanga had built his aashrama. If Vaali entered 
that region, his head would go to shivers by the sage’s curse. I knew 
that he would not come to that place and could not harm me even if 
he came. So there 1 lay protected.” 

The hordes that went north, east and west returned in a month 
and reported that Seeta was not to be found anywhere. “Carefully 
we searched forests, mountains, rivers and cities, but nowhere could 
we find her. Hanumaan, who had gone southwards, is the lucky one. 
Did not the Raakshasa carrying Seeta also travel south-wards? And 
Hanumaan has not yet returned.” 

Raama, hearing this, was satisfied that the Vaanaras had done 
their best. 

Hanumaan and Angada entered and searched the caves and 
forests of the Vindhyas. Then they came upon a desert, where a rishi 
was performing tapas. By his curse it was devoid of trees and plants, 
of birds and beasts. Travelling further south, they saw a big Asura. 
The cruel one, regarding the Vaanara crowd as a good meal, sprang 
up to catch them. They thought at first that this was no other than 
Raavana. 

Angada rushed towards him and gave him a mighty blow. Un¬ 
able to stand it, the Asura spat blood and fell on the earth and lay 
dead like a great hill. Rejoicing in the thought that Raavana was 
dead, the Vaanaras searched the forest for Seeta. But, there was no 
sign of her. And so they carried the search elsewhere. 

Often they would weary of their fruitless search and sit down in 
btemc despair. At such times, Angada, Gandhamaadana or some other 
leader would encourage them and make them resume the search. 
Many days were spent in this way. Yet Seeta was not to be seen and 
they dreaded Sugreeva’s displeasure. 

Very far they travelled southwards in their search. 

Passing through a desert fainting with hunger and thirst, they 
saw a cave from which issued a variety of birds full of the joy of life. 
The gentle breeze which came out of it covered them with the pollen 
of lotus flowers and filled them with fragrance. The Vaanaras 



192 


RAAMAAYANA 


concluded, “undoubtedly there was water where the birds and perfume 
came from.” And the Vaanaras forming a chain with linked hands 
plunged cautiously into the dense darkness of the cave with hearts 
full of hope, though too parched with thirst even to shout. At long 
last, all of a sudden, light appeared and they saw a lovely grove with 
streams of pellucid water and trees bowing under their wealth of fruit. 
Then thcyxame to a city, with streets paved with jewels set in gold, 
and great palaces beautiful as a dream. They went along and then 
they saw an aged tapasvini clad in the garments of a recluse and seated 
on a deer skin. The Vaanaras trembled before the divine splendour 
of her face. 

Hanumaan took courage to approach her. Bowing low before 
her, he said: “Salutations to you, Mother. May we know who you 
are? Thirsty and tired, we entered the dark cave hoping for some 
water. And now that we see this unpeopled golden city with trees 
and tanks, we are afraid, lest this be a vain vision arising from the 
madness of too great sufferings. Explain all this to us and remove our 
fears.” 

She answered: “How did you find your way into tj*is cave? 
You will have plenty of fruits and drink here. This palace was built 
by Maya, the architect of the Daanavas. He learnt the art from Su- 
kraachaarya. 

“Long and happily did Maya live here, till he incurred the enmity 
of Indra, who slew him. Later Indra gave this golden palace to Hema, 
my friend. These buildings and parks are hers. At present she has 
gone to the abode of the gods. But what is your purpose in coming 
here? Why did you weary yourselves wandering in the forests? First 
eat, drink and refresh yourselves and then tell me all about yourselves.” 

They ate and drank and refreshed themselves and were happy. 
Then Hanumaan explained to the ascetic the purpose of their wan¬ 
dering. 

“Raama, son of Emperor Dasaratha, for some reason, left his 
kingdom and lived in the forest with his brother and wife. Then a 
Raakskasa carried off Seeta, the wife of Raama. The two went out 
searching for her. They made the acquaintance of Sugreeva, the 
Vaanara King, and became friends with him. He has sent us on thi# 
mission to search for Seeta and find her for Raama. Our King fixed 
a time-limit for us to return with a clue. We lost our way in the dark¬ 
ness of this cave and the period is now over. Now we do not know 
what to do. Sugreeva is a strict master. For failure to do his bidding 
within the time set, he is sure to visit us with the penalty of death,” 

Swayamprabha, that was the name of the ascetic woman, said: 
“Alas! You cannot by yourselves go out of this cave. No stranger 



THE SEARCH BEGINS 


193 


who enters it can go out of it with life. But yours is a great mission 
and I must, by my tapasya , transport you out. Now shut your eyes.” 

Accordingly they shut their eyes. All at once they found them¬ 
selves on the sea-shore. 

Reaching the sea-shore, they looked round and they were startled 
to discover that it was the beginning of spring. Angada lamented: 
“Alas! The time set has been transgressed. If we return to Kish- 
kindha without any clue about Seeta, the King will surely punish us 
with death. He hates me. It was under pressure from Raama that 
he agreed to make me Yuvaraaja , not because of love for me. Instead 
of going there and losing our lives, let us fast and seek death here and 
now.” Many of his companions agreed with Angada. 

The Vaanara General Taara said: “I do not agree. Why should 
we end our lives? Let us return to the cave of the tapasvini Swayam- 
prabha and live there happily. There is everything in plenty there. 
Neither Sugreeva nor any one else can reach this spot. We shall spend 
the rest our lives, free from care.” 

But Hanumaan ^id:“What unworthy talk this is! What pleasure 
is there in eating, drinking and sleeping in the cave, leaving our families 
in far-away Kishkindha? Sugreeva is a good king, whom we need not 
fear. And if ineed Sugreeva is angry with us and determined to punish 
us, how can this cave give us safety? Can it stand against Lakshmana’s 
rage? Will he not smash it to pieces and kill us? I see no benefit in 
Taara’s counsel. Let us return and tell Sugreeva the whole truth and 
beg for his forgiveness. This is the only way to safety.” 

“I do not agree with Hanumaan,” said Angada. “Sugreeva has 
no love or pity for me. He is sure to kill me. He is of a curel nature. 
Remember how he killed my father. He does not want me to live. 
He will find some excuse or other for killing me. He regards me as 
an obstacle in his way and that of his progeny, who but for me would 
inherit Kishkindha. To break a promise is nothing to him. Did he 
not forget his solemn pledge to Raama that he would search for and 
recover Seeta? Was it not only for fear of Lakshmana and 
his bow thaUie sent us on this search? My poor bereaved mother has 
succumbed to fear and accepted Sugreeva’s protection. She clings to 
life for my sake. Hearing that I am dead, she will end her life. Alas! 
I am miserable and know not waht to do.” 

“My death is certain,” he said again, “if I return to Kishkindha. 
It is far better to fast to death here.” 

He spread on the ground the kusa grass in the manner prescribed 
for the vow of death, bowed to the gods and the dead, and sat facing 
east, determined to die. 

When Angada the Yuvaraaja , took this vow and sat in the posture 

XI.—T. 



194 


RAAMAAYANA 


of a fast unto death, the other Vaanaras cried in grief and resolving 
also to fast with him and die, sat facing east. 

From a neighbouring hill, Sampaati the vulture King, saw this 
crowd of Vaanaras , resigning themselves to fate. Having lost his 
wings and being unable to move, Sampaati had been famishing for a 
long time. He now rejoiced, saying to himself, “so many monkeys 
are going to die here together. I shall have enough food for a long 
while without effort. 

Meanwhile, the Vaanaras , expecting death, were recalling the 
past and talking to one another and loudly lamenting over all that 
had happened. “Because of Kaikeyi, Dasaratha died,” they said: 
“Because of Dasaratha, Raama had to dwell in the forest. Raavana 
carried off Seeta. The heroic Jataayu lost his life in the attempt 
to save Seeta. If the heroic bird had strength enough to continue 
the struggle a little longer, Raama and Lakshmana would have 
arrived on the spot and recovered Seeta. By fate did all these things 
happen and the end of the tale is that we are dying here. In what 
curious ways does fate work!” 

Listening to these lamentations, Sampaati started at the men¬ 
tion of Jataayu who was his brother. Hearing him spoken of as 
dead, he naturally wished to hear the whole story. 

Sampaati was very old. He and Jataayu were the children of 
Aruna, the god of Dawn and brother of Garuda, Hari’s vehicle. 
Jataayu and Sampaati, in their youth competed with each other 
as to who could fly higher and rose in the sky. As they approached 
the sun the heat became intolerable and Jataayu was about to be 
burnt up. But Sampaati spread his wings and protected his brother 
from the fury of the sun. Jataayu was saved, but Sampaati’s wings 
were burnt off. Unable to fly, he fell down on a hill. Since then he 
could not move but stayed in the same place ever hungry for meal 
and just alive. 

“Who brings sad news of my dear brother Jataayu?” he cried 
in agony. “Oh, Vaanaras , is beloved Jataayu dead indeed? Why 
did Raama, son of King Dasaratha, go to the forest? Why did he 
lose his wife? Was Jataayu killed by Raavana? Tell me all.” 

The Vaanaras had resolved to eiid their lives. The wingless, 
old vulture had desired to make an easy meal of them. But now 
things turned out otherwise. The Vaanaras got up, went to Sampaati 
and gently led him down from the hill. Then they talked and ex¬ 
changed information. Sampaati recounted his story. Angada 
related all that had happened in Kishkindha and asked old Sampaati 
how Raama could be helped. Sampaati was old and weak, but his 
eyes had not lost their keeness. He could see things very far off. 



SON OF VAAYU 


195 


He could see Seeta captive in Lanka and described in detail the wealth 
of Raavana’s kingdom. He saw and described how Seeta sat surroun¬ 
ded by Raakshasis in Lanka. 

The Vaanaras were wild with joy. They jumped about saying, 
“Now we know all about Seeta. There is no need for us to die. 
Raama’s purpose will be achieved.” 

Sampaati’s troubles were also over. The boon he had received 
that when he helped Raama he would get back his wings came true 
and even as they were talking, young feathers began to spring and 
grow on his sides. Sampaati now shone with fresh beauty and he 
found satisfaction in performing the funeral obsequies of Jataayu. 


CHAPTER XLVII 

SON OF VAAYU 

From Sampaati tb% Vaanaras learnt the place where Seeta was 
kept a prisoner in the land of the Raakshasas y a hundred yojanas 
across the ocean. But of course it would not do to return to Sugreeva 
at once with this second-hand information. They had outstayed 
the allotted time and only outstanding success could save them from 
punishment. They could not stop their search till they saw with 
their own eyes what Sampaati had described. Only then could 
they fulfil Raama’s purpose. 

But then they had to cross the sea. 

They went to the edge of the water and discussed matters. “How 
can we cross the sea, enter Lanka, see Seeta and return?” Anxiety 
and fear overwhelmed them. 

Angada said: “No matter how hard the task, one should 
never lose courage. Courage is the key to success. To lose heart 
is to lose everything.” 

Then he asked each one of his followers to stlie truly the maxi¬ 
mum length that he could jump. 

“Oh Vaanara warriors!” he said, “much have I heard from 
Sugreeva of your prowess. Your strength and your enterprise are 
beyond dispute. We should fulfil this task. We cannot return to 
Kishkindha without seeing Seeta. That is certain. It is better for 
us to end our lives here than to be slain in disgrace by the king. 
Therefore 4 tell me, one by one, the longest jump you have the strength 
and courage to attempt.” 

Gaja said modestly: “I can jump ten yojanas .” Gavaaksha 



196 


RAAMAAYANA 


said: “I can do twenty.’* Another Vaanara leader claimed he could 
do thirty. 

And so each improved on the figure of the other. At last Jaam- 
bavaan, the oldest of the warriors, spoke: 

“I am now old and infirm. Yet I would gladly spend myself 
to fulfil the king’s command. But what will mere devotion avail 
if not seconded by strength? I think I can manage ninety yojanas , 
but this is not enough to cross the sea and reach Lanka. I can only 
regret my lost youth.” 

The Yuvaraaja himself said: “I can do a hundred yojanas 
and reach Lanka, I have no doubt. But I wonder whether I shall 
have the strength for another jump of equal length for the return 
journey.” 

Jaambavaan answered: “O Prince, you need not doubt your 
strength. Your prowess is as great as Vaali’s. Yet it is not proper 
for the Crown Prince to underake this task while there are others 
to do it under his orders. It is neither statesmanlike nor safe for 
a king to act directly.” 

Then Jaambavaan cast an appraising and admiring look at 
Hanumaan, who had sat apart, listening to the talk, but saying 
nothing. 

“I feel that the son of Vaayu, sitting there in silence is the one 
best fitted by strength and skill to do this deed,” said the old Vaanara 
and walked up to Hanumaan and brought him to their midst. 

Addressing Hanumaan in the hearing of the myriads of gloomy 
Vaanaras , Jaambavaan said: “O warrior, learned in all branches 
of knowledge, why are you sitting silent and apart? You are the 
equal of King Sugreeva, are you not? In strength and splendour 
do you not surpass all the rest of us? Why, are you not the equal 
of Raama and Lakshmana themselves? I have seen Garuda, the 
king of birds crossing the sea. The might of your shoulders is not 
less than that of Garuda’s wings. You are not inferior to the son 
of Vinata in strength or speed, but you are not aware of your own 
prowess and intelligence. There is no equal to you in the whole 
• world. Anjanaa, your mother, was a maiden among the goddesses 
above. By the curse of a rishi she was born as a VaanarL One 
day, while she was wandering care-free on a mountain slope, Vaayu 
saw her beauty and fell in love with her and embraced her. She 
was wroth. ‘Who are you, O wicked one, she asked, ‘who dares 
insult me?’ The Wind-God answered: ‘Be not angry, your body is 
not tainted by my touch and loses not its virgin purity. Not in 
body but in my heart’s desire did I embrace you and out of this ethereal 
embrace, a child will be born to you, equal to me in strength and vigour. 



SON OF VAAYU 


197 


He will be the mightiest and most intelligent amongst the Vaanaras .* 
Thus did the Wind-God pacify Anjanaa. 

“When you were a little child, O Hanumaan, you imagined 
the rising sun to be a fruit and flew towards it in order to pluck 
it. Seeing your effortless and fearless flight Indra, king of the gods, 
became concerned for the sun’s safety and hurled his thunderbolt 
at you. Struck down by it, you fell on a mountain and your right 
jaw was broken. Enraged by this, your father the Wind-God stopped 
his movements and stood still. All living creatures became breathless 
and felt strangled in the stillness. The gods begged Vaayu to lay 
aside his anger and showered blessings on you. Brahma and Indra 
gave you boons. No weapon can slay you. Death can only come 
to you at your will and not otherwise. You are immortal. Born 
of Anjanaa and begotten of the spirit of the Wind-God, you are 
equal to him in splendour, intelligence and power, 

“But for all your strength, you are virtuous and modest. You 
alone can help us to fulfil Raama’s purpose. Crossing the sea is 
no hard task for you. This great army of Vanaaras , struggling in 
a sea of distress, you should rescue. You, who can cross the sea, 
should not leave your power unused. 

“Increase your stature. You are the equal of Garuda. Once 
I too was strong like you and traversed the globe twenty-one times. 
At the churning of the ocean of milk, I fetched herbs from the four 
quarters at the bidding of the gods. But now I am old and weak. 
You are the sole hope of the Vaanaras . 

“O, Son of Anjanaa, we beg you, noble one! With your heri¬ 
tage of divine strength, delay no further. Realise your true strength 
and spring forward. Like Trivikrama, you can cross the sea at a 
single jump. Do it and end our troubles.” 

The aged Jaambavaan thus praised Hanumaan, reminded him 
of his strength and roused his dormant courage. At once Hanu- 
maan’s form began to swell like the sea in high tide. Even as the 
Vaanaras were watching him, the son of Vaayu grew in size. The 
radiance qf his body filled Angada and his companions with wonder 
and joy. 

From now on, Hanumaan is the hero of the Raamaayana. 
The devotees of Vishnu lovingly call him the ‘Junior Servant of Hari.’ 
The Senior Servant is Garuda who is always with Vishnu in personal 
attendance. 

How the Junior Servant of Hari ended the grief of Seeta, destroyed 
by fire the city of Raavana and returned to the Lord and told him: 
“Found I have Seeta”—we shall now proceed to relate. • 

Reminded of his might by Jaambavaan, Hanumaan was now 



198 


RAAMAAYANA 


determined to fulfil Raama’s purpose. And with fervour he uttered 
his faith : 

“May your words come true. Flying through the sky and 
alighting in Lanka, I shall see Jaanaki, I have no doubt. I shall 
return and bring you good news. To take the jump I must press 
my foot hard against the earth. This hill may stand it,’* he said 
and climbed up the Mahendra hill. 

There for a while he threw his whole strength into his foot and 
walked a few steps. The creatures in the hill could not endure it 
and came out. 

Standing on the hill, Hanumaan looked at the sea and directed 
his yc^o-concentrated mind towards Lanka. He said to himself: 
“I shall search and find Seeta. I shall fly in the sky and cross the 
sea.” 

With this resolve he offered worship and prayer to Soorya, 
Indra, Vaayu, Brahma, and all creation. Then facing east, he 
made obeisance to his father Vaayu and, magnifying his frame still 
further, turned towards the south. 

He pressed the hill with his feet and struck it with his hands. 
At this impact the flowers fell from the trees and covered the hill. 
Squeezed irresistibly by the pressure of his feet the hill threw out 
springs of water, like the rut flowing down the cheeks of the elephant. 
Many coloured veins of ore burst out of the rock. From the caves 
the beasts emerged with panic-stricken outcries. Hooded serpents 
emitting venom bit the rock and sparks flew out. 

The hair of Hanumaan’s body stood on end and he roared 
and lashed his tail on the ground. He contracted his hind parts, 
held his breath, pressed down his feet, folded his ears and stiffened 
his muscles. Then with a roar of triumph he rose into the sky and 
like Garuda flew with the speed of Raama’s arrow. With the mo¬ 
mentum of his speed, many trees were uprooted and followed in his 
wake. Like freinds who speed a parting guest, they accompanied 
him a little way, showering down their flowers and dropped. One 
by one the trees that followed Hanumaan fell into the sea, like the 
mountains which of old were pursued by Indra and denuded of their 
wings. Covered with bright-coloured flowers the sea shone like 
the sky with its stars. Hanumaan’s arms with their outspread hands 
as he flew through the sky appeared like two five-headed cobras. 
He seemed to swallow the sky as he flew forward. His eyes glistened 
Kke mountain forests on fire. His red nose shone like the evening 
sun. His hyge frame spanned the sky like an enormous comet. 
The air roared as he sped fast. Beneath him his shadow travelled, 
like a ship on the sea. It looked^ as though a huge mountain with 



SON OF VAAYU 


199 


wings was flying in the sky. Hidden at times by clouds and again 
emerging from them, he shone like the moon sailing across the sky. 
The Gandharvas showered flowers. The Devarishis blessed him. 

With courage equal to every occasion, with foresight, skill 
and resolution, Hanumaan met and survived the trials on the way. 
Shooting up suddenly from the sea, a mighty mountain rose and 
stood in his way. Hanumaan struck it with his chest and the Mynaaka 
mountain yielded, like a cloud struck by the wind. 

The mountain said: “My son, I am mount Mynaaka. The 
kind Ocean bade me help Sri Raama, the descendant of the Sagara 
race. The Ocean is an old friend of that race. In honour of that 
ancient association, stay here on me for a while. You will fulfil 
Raama’s purpose all the better for this rest. When Indra struck 
with his thunder all the hills, I fled from his persecution and hid 
myself in the ocean and survived. The Ocean who gave me shelter ' 
now bids me help you. The sons of Sagara dug and deepened the 
Ocean. Did not your father Vaayu help me to escape from Indra’s 
thunder-bolt and find sanctuary in the sea? Both the Ocean and my¬ 
self will be pleased if you will accept my hospitality and rest here 
for a while." 

But Hanumaan could not yield to Mynaaka’s importunity and 
said politely: “I cannot stop, my friend. I have no time to lose. 
My vow to fulfil Raama’s purpose permits no delay. Your kind words 
are enough to please me." 

He stroked the mountain affectionately with his hand and took 
its leave. 

Later, a huge form stood in his way and said: “Enter my mouth. 

I have been without food for a long time and am eagerly waiting for 
you," and the monster opened its mouth wide like a cave. 

Hanumaan answered: “I am bent on doing Raama’s purpose. 
Do not stop me." 

“Impossible!" said the monster. “You must enter my mouth." 

Hanumaan thought quickly and decided what to do. Step by 
step he made his body grow bigger and bigger. The Raakshasa 
form (which had been assumed by Surasa, the Naaga maiden) opened 
its mouth correspondingly wider and wider. 

When the mouth was thus enormously wide, all of a sudden 
Hanumaan contracted his body into a speck and, darting through 
the demon’s mouth and body, came out again and resumed his former 
normal shape. 

He then laughed and said: “You have had your wish, mother. 

I have entered your mouth. What more do you need?” 

And the Naaga goddess blessed him saying, “Your effor 



200 


RAAMAAYANA 


will be crowned with success. I did this at the bidding of the gods 
who wanted to test you. Raama’s purpose, which you seek to serve, 
will assuredly triumph.” 

This was not the last of his trials. As he was flying in the sky, 
for no reason which he could discover, he found his speed obstructed 
and he suffered like a ship against a contrary wind. Some mighty 
force, he felt, was holding him and dragging him down. 

He looked up and down and on all four sides. Then he dis¬ 
covered the cause. It was a huge she-demon in the sea holding him 
by his shadow below, arresting his speed and dragging him down. 

The demon, holding him by his shadow, said: “Come, Come! 
Long have I been waiting for you, No longer can I bear my hunger,” 
and she opened her mouth like a cave. 

At once Hanumaan entered her mouth and ripped a way out 
through her entrails and emerged. The demon died and sank down 
in the water. Like the full moon emerging from an eclipse, Hanu- 
maan shone in the sky and resumed his journey. 

Thus surviving many trials with the help of his subtle wit, courage 
and strength, he flew across the ocean and approached the coast of 
Lanka covered with plantain and cocoanut trees. 

On the shore of the island he saw groves and mountains and 
forests and the mouths of rivers. 

Hanumaan saw the wealth of Raavana’s kingdom and the beauty 
of the fortified city. 

“I have reached my destination,” said Hanumaan to himself. 
“Now without letting the Raakshasas know who or what I am, I must 
search the place and find out where Seeta is kept.” 

He reduced his huge form to the size of a normal monkey and 
alighted on a hill-top in Lanka. 


CHAPTER XLVm 

THE SEARCH IN LANKA 

Full of hope, Hanumaan alighted and set foot in Lanka. But 
soon the flush of triumph at the accomplishment of the journey gave 
place to sober thinking. 

“True 1 have crossed the sea, but that is only the beginning of 
my mission. There, on mount Trikoota, stands Raavana’s mag¬ 
nificent city, as if suspended in the sky. How beautiful, how wealthy, 
how well secured it is. The city and the fortress are not inferior to 
Amaraavati or Bhogavati. The lovely groves, the elegant buildings. 



THE SEARCH IN LANKA 


201 


the engines of defence, deep moats, these fill me with much admiration 
but also with greater concern. 

“Who can attack and vanquish this Raavana? How can an 
army cross the sea which I have just crossed? Even if it crosses 
the sea and reaches this shore, how can it attack and bring down 
this fortress defended by bulwarks manned by well-armed warriors? 
Neither guile nor force can bring it down. 

“But first I must find out whether Seeta is alive or not. Other 
questions can wait. When and how can I best enter this well-guarded 
city? I have to search it thoroughly, if I am to discover the place 
where Seeta is kept. If thoughtlessly I do something wrong now, 
this error would be irretrievable and a great purpose would fail because 
of haste or negligence on my part. If I enter the city by day, it will 
be noticed by the Raakshasas. It is best I go in at night. But in what 
shape shall I go? To ward off suspicion, I must put on a trivial 
inconspicuous shape.” 

Accordingly he shrank to the size of a little monkey, no bigger 
than a cat. To enter and search the palaces and parks of this vast 
city, this would be most convenient. His present form was as much 
smaller than his usual size as the latter was than the mighty proportions 
he had assumed as he crossed the sea. 

By now the Sun had set. The little Vaanara walked towards 
the fortress gate. The moon shone brightly. Hanumaan was glad 
and grateful for this help in his search. 

Even on a distant view Hanumaan .wondered at the wealth and 
beauty displayed in Raavana’s capital. The streets and mansions 
were bright with flags and festoons and glittered with gold and precious 
gems. The breeze blew gently from the sea. Like Indra’s Amaraavati 
and Kubera’s Alakaapuri, Raavana’s capital had attained the peak 
of prosperity. The messenger of Raama was filled with wonder 
and anxiety how to overcome the master of such wealth and military 
power. 

As he was walking along in amazement and anxiety, he was rudely 
accosted by the terrible-looking Guardian goddess of the city, 

“Who are you, little monkey? How did you manage to come 
here and why are you here at all? Speak the truth.” 

“Yes, I am indeed a little monkey and I have come here to look 
at this beautiful city. I shall go back after I have gone round and 
Seen everything and satisfied my curiosity.” 

The deity struck an angry blow at the monkey. 

Hanumaan returned the blow carelessly with his left hand. It 
doubled her up with agony on the ground. 

But soon she got up and remembered the prophecy that, when 



202 


RAAMAAYANA 


a monkey should strike and throw her down, the city she gaurded 
would be destroyed. 

She said to herself: “Raavana’s sins are many and grievous. 
The end of Lanka is approaching. The word of the gods is about 
to be fulfilled/’ And she stood aside. The goddess of Lanka was 
not a servant of Raavana. She was the spirit of the city. 

Hanumaan climbed over the wall and jumped into the city. 
It was part of the ancient code of warfare that one should not enter 
the enemy’s fortress through the regular gate, but should make his 
entry in an out-of-the-way manner. * 

Vowing that the Raakshasas should be destroyed he entered the 
fortress of Lanka with his left foot foremost, for that meant defeat 
for the enemy. 

He went along the royal street which was strewn with beautiful 
flowers. Like ligntning shining through the clouds the buildings 
shone against the sky. Clambering up the mansions and going 
along on their roofs, he admired the beauty of the city. The Raak¬ 
shasas* mansions and streets and their decorations shone with ineffable 
beauty. The sounds of cultivated and correct music were heard. 
Lovely women moved about to the accompaniment of tinkling 
anklets. The city was filled with sounds indicating a full and 
joyous life. 

In some houses mantras were being chanted. In some others 
Vedic chants were heard. In others songs celebrating the heroic 
exploits and glory of Raavana were being sung. Soldiers and scouts 
were everywhere. In the streets were people dedicated to particular 
religious practices and vows. There were others cruel in looks and 
ugly. The guards were armed with bows, swords, cudgels, slings, 
lances and other weapons. All the warriors were clad in armour. 
Some were handsome, some ugly. Complexions varied from fair 
through brown to black. Some figures were very tall, others very 
short. Thus Hanumaan saw that the population had been drawn 
from a wide area with varying climates and that the army had been 
recruited from the pick of many nations. 

He examined mansion after mansion. He saw women of ex¬ 
quisite beauty, some of them in the company of their husbands and 
others by themselves. He saw many young damsels, bright and 
beautiful like images of molten gold. Some were seated on the 
terraces, others were sleeping in their beds. Some were playing, 
others singing. 

Innumerable beautiful women he saw, but not Seeta pining for 
Raama. The sight of so much beauty only filled Hanumaan’s heart 
with disappointment and sadness. 



THE SEARCH IN LANKA 


203 


He entered and examined the homes of many Raakshasas. 
There were war elephants, pure-bred horses, chariots and armou¬ 
ries. Soldiers stood fully armed. 

After passing through many mansions and gardens filled with 
merriment and music, he came to a great palace rising aloft in a 
nobility of splendour far transcending all the magnificent buildings 
around. 

Looking at the elephants, horses and foot-soldiers in front, 
the high walls surrounding it and the beauty of its structure and the 
richness of its decorations, he concluded that this was Raavana’s 
own palace, the central glory of splendid Lanka. He entered this 
palace. It was in every way a heaven on earth worthy of Raavana’s 
peerless power and glory. The park, the birds sporting there, the 
shrines scattered here and there, filled Hanumaan with wonder. 

He said to himself: “What wealth, what beauty and what bliss!”. 

He was for a while lost in amazement. But soon he recollected 
that he had not yet found Seeta. Admiration gave place to concern 
over the yet unfulfilled purpose for which he had come. 

Passing through many mansions, he entered the innermost 
private apartment of Raavana and was almost overcome with the 
luxury and richness of its appointments which made it look a very 
abode of the gods. Everywhere was gold and silver, ivory and gems 
and pearls, and beautiful carpets and furniture and in their midst 
he saw the Pushpaka Vimaana . 

It was a magic vehicle obtained from Brahma by Kubera. Van¬ 
quishing Kubera, Raavana brought it to Lanka as his booty. As 
from Vasishtha’s cow, in the Pushpaka car one could get any thing 
one desired. 

Raavana’s chamber, which Hanumaan now entered, was a 
very ocean of delight. Countless lovely women lay sleeping in the 
spacious chamber, some linked arm in arm and all in dishabille and 
the careless attitudes of sleep, making the place look like a garden 
of bright, flower-laden creepers. 

With his spirit controlled by dharma , Hanumaan looked at all 
these sleeping women, each more beautiful than the other and all 
filled with joy and love, to see if any of them could be Seeta. Raavana’s 
power to take what shape he would and to please all women was evident 
from the sight of these lovely women. 

Hanumaan pulled himself together reproachfully at his own 
folly in supposing for a moment that Seeta could be in that sensual 
paradise of happy damsels. “It is certain that Seeta is not in this 
crowd. What a fool I am to search for her in this company! This 
is no place for her.” 



204 


RAAMAAYANA 


Then he went elsewhere. In another chamber he saw many 
beds. He saw one more gorgeous than the rest, covered with gold 
and diamonds and Raavana stretched on it, like another mount 
Meru. His form and majestic splendour made even Hanumaan 
tremble for a moment. 

He stood on one side and scanned the sleeping figure unable 
for a time to take his eyes off the majestic and virile beauty of that 
mighty form—the great muscles now in repose, the symmetrical 
grace of limbs which made the Raakshasa King at once beautiful 
and terrible. 

Then Hanumaan looked at the women in the beds around and 
on the carpets. Some, who had fallen asleep while singing, were 
still hugging their musical instruments. 

His eyes finally fell on a figure lying on a divinely beautiful cot. 
The shapeliness of her limbs and the beauty of her features made 
Hanumaan imagine it might be Seeta. He leaped up with joy. 

The next instant he cursed himself for his folly. “Fie, fie,” 
he said to himself, “how foolish I have been! Could Seeta sleep 
thus carelessly, covered with jewels, in a stranger’s chamber? The 
very thought is a sin.” And he was overwhelmed with shame and 
sorrow at his error. 

Then he said to himself: “Because she would not yield to him, 
this Raakshasa must have killed her. What use is there in continuing 
the search?” 

He had now searched the inner apartments of Raavana’s palace. 
The bed room, the dining room, the hall of drink, the music room, 
all places had been searched and Seeta was nowhere found. “I 
have entered every nook and corner. Against all the rules of propriety 
I have even looked at every one in the women’s chambers. But all 
in vain.” 

Saying this he left the hall of drink and went to the garden and 
looked into the little shrines and the arbours made of creepers. But 
all in vain. 

“I have seen all Lanka,” he thought with irrepressible grief. 
“I have seen every inch of Raavana’s palace. What more could X 
do here? Am I to return without seeing Seeta? No. I shall rather 
end my life here. Yes, that is the only thing for me to do.” 

But again he said to himself. “Fie, fie on me for yielding to 
such despondency unworthy and dishonourable.” 

He sprang up again and searched once again every inch of the 
places he had been through. He opened every door and window 
and looked in. There were ugly women, beautiful human and Naaga 
maidens, all captured by the Raakshasa , but not Seeta* 



SEETA IN THE ASOKA PARK 


205 


Once again his heart sank. He did not know what to do. He 
said to himself: “If I return to Kishkindha failing in my mission, 
with what face shall I meet my friends? If Raama loses all hopes 
of recovering Seeta, what would happen to him? He would surely 
die. And after that, what would happen to others? Instead of 
going back to Sugreeva and telling him that all my labours have 
been wasted, it would be far better to stay here and spend the rest 
of my days in the forest and sea-shore of Lanka. But why live on? 
Is it not best to end my life? 

“But, then, was Sampaati wrong in saying that Seeta was in 
Lanka? Or has she been killed by the Raakshasa since Sampaati 
sighted her in this island? She might well have been devoured by 
the Raakshasis. Nothing is clear, everything is enveloped in doubt. 
What shall I do? 

Thus was Hanumaan lost in anxiety and thought. Just then 
his eyes lighted on what he had so far left unexplored—a park attached 
to a shrine and surrounded by high walls. “Oh, here is a park I 
have not seen or searched so far. Here surely I shall find Seeta.” 

With these words as the son of Vaayu meditated on Raama, 
hope sprang within his breast. The secluded park was well protected 
by high walls. “Yes, Seeta must be here,” he said to himself. Again 
he bowed to the gods. He jumped up and sat on the wall of the 
Asoka Vana and surveyed the beautiful park. 


CHAPTER XLXX 

SEETA IN THE ASOKA PARK 

As Hanumaan stood on the high wall, he did not know why, 
a thrill of joy passed through his frame. It was the invisible atmos¬ 
phere which envelopes and accomplished mission and influences 
subtly the devoted heart. As he had at last reached the spot where 
Seeta was, his whole being throbbed with exulting expectation without 
any apparent reason. 

It was an early spring night. Trees and plants were in flower. 
Hanumaan jumped to a place where there was a thick cluster of trees. 
This disturbed the birds that rested there and they flew out with 
sweet noises. Deer and other animals moved about. Flowers 
dropped from the branches and covered the body of Hanumaan. 

The creatures in the park, looking at the lovely figure of Hanumaan 
covered all over with flowers, thought that the God of Spring was 
visiting the grove in the early dawn. 



206 


RAAMAAYANA 


The garden was entrancingly beautiful. Lovely tanks, terraces 
decorated with gold, silver, ivory, pearl and coral, crystal steps, 
artificial hills and waterfalls—the sight filled Hanumaan’s heart 
with joy. Around some trees were platforms overlaid with gold and 
silver. Little bells suspended from the trees made music in the breeze. 

Hanumaan climbed up and sat hidden among the leaves of a 
tall, spreading tree with a golden platform around its stem. 

“if she be alive and in Lanka,” said Hanumaan to himself, 
“Seeta would surely visit this garden. She would choose this place 
above all other for solitude and contemplation of Raama. They 
said, did they not, that she loved groves and trees? She would surely 
come here at dawn to offer worship to the Universal Mother.” 

He gazed all round, hiding himself among the leaves. He sat 
on a branch and looked below. He beheld a female figure seated 
^on that platform, blindingly beautiful and divinely pure. 

Thin and pale she shone like the streak of the moon in the begin¬ 
ning of the bright half of the month. Her beauty glowed fitfully 
through deepest dejection like flame through enveloping smoke. 
Wrapped in a soiled upper garment she resembled a lovely lotus 
obscured by miry moss. Her face was bathed in tears, and she was 
wan and thin for want of food. She had no thoughts but of sorrow, 
no glimpse of friends or hope. There were only Raakshasis wherever 
she turned her eyes, and she felt like a doe which had lost its herd 
and found itself beset by a pack of wild dogs. A single snake-like 
braid of hair wandered unregarded down to her hip. She seemed to 
Hanumaan at once adorable and pitiful, like the holy word torn 
from its context by infidels, like prosperity sunk in unmerited ruin, 
like shattered hope and faith betrayed, like frustrated fulfilment, 
like intellect muddied by insanity, like blameless purity besmirched 
by foul slander. 

Hanumaan said to himself with conviction: “This image of 
beautiful despair is surely Seeta. For behold, hanging unregarded 
on the branches of the tree are the jewels described by Raama as 
having been on her when she was carried away—all except those which 
she dropped during the flight and which were picked up by us on the 
hill. And see, the scarf she wears, though soiled and crumpled, 
is the fellow to the one we found. Surely this sublimely beautiful lady, 
who seems like one steadfast in true love in a tempest-tossed sea of 
troubles, is Raama’s beloved queen, It is for her that Raama is 
consumed by a three-fold agony—grief for her suffering, wrath for 
the insult to her and heart-broken pangs at separation from her. 
Surely he is ever in her heart and she in his, and in truth they are not 
parted or they could not live.” 



SEETA IN THE ASOKA PARK 


207 


And as he continued to see her, his heart leapt back across the 
ocean and sought Raama’s feet in adoration. And again he looked 
at Seeta and said to himself : “It was for the sake of this divine lady 
that the mighty Vaali, the peer of Raavana in prowess was slain; 
for her that Kabandha and Viraadha met their death, and fourteen 
thousand fierce Raaksfiasas with Khara, Dooshana and Trisiras 
crimsoned with their gore the glades of Janasthaana. It was for 
her that the splendid sovereignty of the Vaanaras was wrested from 
the heroic Vaali and given to Sugreeva. It is to do her service that 
I crossed the sea, the lord of rivers and am now here in Lanka. All 
this seems much—but verily, if for her sake Raama should transform 
or even destroy the universe, 1 would say from my soul—It is weH 
done! She is worth it all and more!” 

And again Hanumaan’s heart crossed the sea back and dwelt 
on Raama far away. 

Just then, as on the clear surface of a lake a swan might glide,. 
so in the blue sky the moon swam into sight and shone brightly as 
if on purpose to help the son of Vaayu. 

Peering between the leaves and not knowing what to do, Hanu~ 
maan took another long look at the face of Seeta, a face that disclosed 
a sea of care like a heavily-laden ship caught in a storm. The Raak- 
shasis who guarded her were intolerably ugly. One had only one 
eye, another only one ear. Some were without ears and some without 
noses. Some had noses turned steeply upward. Some were bald, 
while some had done their hair in grotesque styles. Some had pendant 
stomachs and some had camel’s lips. Some were hunch-backs. Some 
were dwarfs and some tall like palmyrah trees. Swine-face, tiger-face, 
buffalo-face,, goat-face—all were to be seen. These unsightly creatures 
were holding spears and other weapons in their hands. 

And in their midst, the pale-faced princess sat trembling, be¬ 
friended only by her virtue, like an unsupported beautiful creeper 
fallen on the ground. 

It was still dark and not yet dawn. Raavana was roused from 
his slumber by the chanting of the Vedas and the morning songs 
of the court bards. The moment he awoke, he thought of Seeta 
and started towards the park where she was kept. 

With all his retinue, he entered the palace park, accompani¬ 
ed by scented torches and the royal umbrella, surrounded by 
maidens, covered all over with brilliant ornaments' and clad in 
spotless white clothes. Raavana appeared charming like another 
Manmatha. 

As the procession entered the gate, Hanumaan could hear 
the noise of the crowd and the tinkling of women’s anklets. Soon. 



208 


RAAMAAYANA 


he saw the Raakshasa king approaching. At once Hanumaan 
hid himself more effectively than before among thick leaves. 

As Raavana came towards Seeta, his strength and splendour 
were wonderful to behold. At his sight Seeta’s body shrank and 
trembled like a plantain tree in a storm. 

As one reads or listens to this sacred story, one should form 
a mental image of Seeta in her present state. One can imagine the 
agony of despair of any good woman who has by misfortune fallen 
into the power of a lustful man. What must be the state of 
Seeta, daughter of Janaka and wife of Raamachandra, in such a 
predicament? To appreciate Vaalmeeki’s metaphors and similes 
in this context, one should purify one’s heart and fire it with 
piety. 

One feels unequal to rendering into another language the 
beautiful similes by which Vaalmeeki illustrates her condition. 
Only a few are cited here to give some idea of them. 

Raavana approached Seeta still in the hope of obtaining her 
consent. Seeta was covered with dust and had no jewels on her person 
but she shone as if wearing all the jewels that a princess must wear. 
She looked like a beautiful tree felled down and lying low. Her 
face was covered by light and shadow, like a lotus flower stained 
by mire. She swayed like a cobra bound by charms. Her state 
was like one surrounded by raging fires on all four sides, like an army 
which had lost its chief warriors, like a river which had run dry, 
like a vessel for sacrificial fire that suffered desecration, like a lovely 
lotus tank destroyed by elephants, like a flowering creeper uprooted 
and cast aside, like a cow elephant separated from the leader of the 
herd, captured and tied as a prisoner. 

Seeta sat trembling, overwhelmed with grief and fear. When 
she perceived Raavana’s approach, that very instant her heart travelled 
to Raama like a chariot drawn by swift steeds. With faded face and 
wasted form, she thought of her protectors far away. “When will 
they come? Will they ever come?” she asked herself and meditated 
on God. 

Raavana approached and spoke to her. Hidden in the branches 
of the tree, Hanumaan watched what went on below. 



CHAPTER L 


RAAVANA’S SOLICITATION 

To Seeta, plunged in a sea of sorrow and clinging to dharma and to 
the thought of her lord, Raavana spoke these words: 

“O beautiful one! Why do you shrink from me? Do you not 
see how much I care for you? Though it is lawful for a Raakshasa 
to take another’s wife and possess her by force, I am a beggar for 
your love. There is no need to fear me. I shall never touch you 
till your heart turns towards me. Do not be afraid. My one wish 
is that you should care for me as I do for you. You must accept me 
with affection. Why do you make your body a prey to unavailing 
sorrow? 

“O beautiful one! There is none like you in loveliness, none 
in all the world. It is not right for you to reject beautiful jewels and 
clothes, to sleep on the ground and leave your hair unkempt. O 
gem among women, do not thus waste your youth and beauty. Now 
you have come under my protection, you should lack nothing. All 
pleasures are suitors for your selection. 

“I cannot take my eyes away from your face bright like the full 
moon. Wherever on your body I set my eyes, there they remain 
fixed and immovable. Why should one with so much beauty suffer 
so much sorrow? Accept me and enjoy all the pleasures of the world. 
I will conquer the world and give it to Janaka for your sake. What 
will I not do for you? You will be my sovereign consort. All the 
queens and women in the palace will be ruled by you. My wealth, 
my kingdom, all shall be yours to enjoy. Lanka and myself, why, the 
whole earth, shall belong to you. My strength and courage are known 
to the Devas and Asuras. Vanquished by me, they stand with bowed 
heads. 

“With jewels and garments fit for you my hand-maidens will 
adorn you. I long to see you splendidly decked. And you will be 
free to give away generous gifts in charity. Your authority will 
extend over all mankind. My subjects and kinsfolk will deem it a 
joy to serve you. 

“Why do you waste your thoughts on wretched Raama, wan¬ 
dering in the forest? How can you love, how can you trust one 
who has been deprived of his rights and driven out of his kingdom 
and is roaming about clad in bark garments? What can this help¬ 
less fellow do? The Goddess of Wealth, she that presides over Power 
and she who rules over Success, have all abandoned him, and you 
know it. It is even doubtful whether he is alive today. Anyhow, 



210 


RAAMAAYANA 


you may take it, he will never set eyes on you again, much less come 
near you. Like Garuda seizing a serpent, you have captivated my 
heart. I am unable to escape. Even in your present state, devoid 
of jewels or good clothes, you have drawn me away from my other 
wives. What can I do now? In my apartments are innumerable 
lovely women. But after seeing you, I can bear the sight of none 
of them. You will be Queen over all of them and receive their humble 
service. 

“In what sense can Raama equal me? Do you not see that 
in severe austerities gone through, in strength, wealth and glory, 
in every way, I am superior to him? Shake off your fear. We shall 
wander over the whole world, happy in each other’s company. With 
me you will enjoy limitless wealth and pleasure. Life will be one 
continuous joy. O beautiful one, have pity on me. Let us sport 
together in the parks and groves by the sea. Only say ‘yes’.” 

Thus Raavana uttered his impassioned appeal for love and pity. 

When Raavana had finished speaking, Seeta plucked a little 
blade of grass and, placing it between them, laughed in derision and 
gently spoke: 

“Raavana, lay aside all such vain thoughts concerning me. It 
is altogether improper for you to desire me. Turn your heart to 
your wives. Never can I agree to what you say. Think of the family 
I was born in. Think of the family I was married into. How can 
you ever hope to persuade me? Do not give room for such foolish 
and impossible desires and make sorrow for yourself!” 

Then she turned her face away and continued : 

“How can I become your wife, when 1 am the wife of another? 
Do not violate dharma. Do not tread the path of sin. Listen to me. 
Think how carefully you watch over your wives to keep them safe 
from the touch of others. Would not other husbands do the same 
by their wives? Remember other men are like you. Do not cast 
your eyes on another’s wife. To be happy with your own is the way 
of true happiness. But if you allow your mind to dwell on another’s 
wife, sorrow and dishonour will be your portion. 

“Is there none in the world to advise you aright? Why do you 
do evil and bring destruction on yourself and on your people? When 
a king loses self-control, his kingdom and wealth will all be destroyed. 
Be sure, this Lanka and its great wealth will be utterly destroyed 
if you persist in your sin, and the foes whom you have conquered 
and humiliated will rejoice. I have no use for the wealth and the 
pleasures that you promise. They do not tempt me. I have married 
Raama and 1 cannot take my mind and heart away from him. I, 
who held his hand, can never touch another, never. I am his, the 



RAAV ANA’S SOLICITATION 


211 


Prince’s, entirely and for ever. I belong to him, as the Veda belongs 
to one who has reverently mastered it. It is not right for anyone 
else to look on me with longing eyes. Listen to me who speaks for 
your good. Beg Raama humbly for forgiveness and escape from 
his anger. Do not go in search of your own ruin. Raama is generous 
and will surely forgive you if you seek his mercy. Seek forgiveness 
and safety. Do not seek death and destruction. 

“There, I hear even now the twang of Raama’s bow. You can¬ 
not escape. Yama stands very near, ready to carry you away. The 
arrows of Raama and Lakshmana will soon be here in Lanka and 
your city will be in flames. Did not Raama utterly destroy the 
Raakshasas at Janasthaana? Did you not, knowing his strength 
come like a thief to our hut, when Raama and Lakshmana were 
away, to steal me? Can you for a moment stand before them face 
to face? Can a dog approach a tiger? Will it not flee from the 
very scent? As the sun sucks up moisture from the wet earth, Raama 
and Lakshmana will drink your life. Will you run to hide yourself 
among the mountains? Will you try to escape under the sea? Even 
then, as at the appointed hour the tree is struck by lightning, so will 
you perish at their hands. You cannot escape.” 

Thus Seeta ended with a stern warning. Raavana controlled 
his anger and spoke: 

“O Seeta, doting on this spurious ascetic Raama, you talk foolishly 
and repay my loving words with insult and contumely. Because 
of my love for you, I have refrained, else you would be dead by now. 
Of the time I had allowed you, two months more remain. Change 
your mind before they pass. Be my wife and come to my bed. If 
you refuse, you will be sent to my kitchen and cooked for my meal. 
Beware!” 

It was well-known that the food of the Raakshasas included 
human flesh. Hence this threat of Raavana was no exaggeration, but 
conveyed a clear possibility. Yet Seeta was unafraid, and answered: 

“Alas! Alas! Is there none to give you good advice? Have 
you no friend to save you from this sin and put you on the path of 
virtue? You cannot escape Raama’s punishment. Like a rabbit 
antagonising a wild elephant you have incurred the wrath of Raama. 
O wretch who stole me in his absence, are you not ashamed? Your 
destruction is certain. Your evil fate has driven you to this act. 
And yet you are the brother of Kubera; you are famous as a warrior; 
you are the master of a complete four-limbed army. Why should 
you do this mean deed in this mean way?” 

Raavana’s eyes rolled in anger and he looked fiercely at Seeta, 
hissing like a snake. 



212 


RAAMAAYANA 


Seeing his mounting anger, one of his young wives, Dhaanya- 
maali, walked up to his side and, embracing him, said: 

“King! Why do you vex yourself over this mean human crea¬ 
ture who does not seem to care for you? She has not the good for¬ 
tune to be your wife: that is all. And what is there so attractive 
about her? Why do you waste your thought on this puny creature? 
Come away. Let us enjoy ourselves.” 

She drew him away affectionately and the Raakshasa went with 
her, laughing. 

Before he went, Raavana ordered the Raakshasis who guarded 
Seeta to bring her round somehow, and with resounding steps left 
the Asoka park, followed by his retinue. As soon as he turned his 
back, the Raakshasis surrounded Seeta. 

The Princess, who had been bold up till now, trembled when 
she looked at these ugly creatures that began speaking to her. 

“When Raavana, scion of a noble family, a world-famous warrior, 
desires you,” said one, “how can you refuse him, O foolish girl? 
Who do you think Raavana is? Know that he is a direct descendant 
of Brahma. He is the grandson of Pulastya Prajaapati, son of Brahma, 
a hero who has won many battles and vanquished many foes. How 
foolish to slight him!” 

“Let not pride ruin you,” said another. “Raavana is the son 
of rishi Visravas. Do not think he is a nobody. Accept him and 
be happy.” 

“The king of the Raakshasas , who defeated in battle and put 
to flight the gods of heaven, invites you to be his wife,” said another. 
“You must yield, poor girl, or you must die.” 

“Slighting all his other wives,” said another, “Raavana wants 
you and promises to make you chief among his queens. Forsaking 
all his noble wives, the King, bewitched by you beauty, begs for your 
love and offers to make you first among his consorts. Why are you 
foolishly obstinate?” 

“None in all the world can equal Lord Raavana,” said another. 
“Good fortune comes seeking you and you spurn it. How foolish 1” 

“The Sun and the Wind gods are afraid of the Raakshasa king. 
And he comes seeking you and wants to make you his favourite wifel 
Do not let your pride betray you. Do not reject the fortune that 
comes to you unsought.” 

And another concluded: “We have given you good advice. 
We have done our best and we leave the rest to you. If you reject 
his offer, you must surely die.” 



CHAPTER U 


FIRST AMONG THE ASTUTE 

The boldest and most strong-minded woman may, if kept in cap¬ 
tivity for a long period, lose heart and become depressed. 

Seeta hoped month after month that her lord would discover 
her whereabouts and come to her rescue. Sick with disappointed 
hope, alone in the midst of enemies, she clung to life only from an 
abiding faith in the love of Raama which made her feel that he would 
surely come. 

The Raakshasis plied her with what from their point of view was* 
well-meant counsel. “Won’t you listen to our advice? You are 
a human and so lack sense. You still hold on to this wretched man- 
husband of yours. 

“Your proper place is our King’s bed-chamber. That is the 
place for every kind of pleasure. But spurning his offer, you are 
for ever thinking of your worthless husband. Why are you still 
fond of this luck-less wretch driven out of his kingdom? You will 
never see him again. Yield to Raavana, and be happy.” 

Seeta, hearing these Words, could only shed tears. 

“What sinful words you utter!” she said. “Never can I do 
what you say. You tell me that Raama is poor, and wretched and 
an exile from his home. All this I know. But among us of the race 
of men, no wife would think of giving up her husband on such grounds. 
It is wicked for the Raakshasa king to desire me for his wife. As the 
sun’s brightness belongs inseparably to the sun, so do I belong to 
Raama. As Sachi is faithful to Indra, or Arundhati to Vasishtha, 
so am I ever to Raama.” 

The Raakshasis gave up all hopes of persuading her and said 
to one another: “What can one do with a stubborn fool like this? 
It is best to eat her before she gets too thin with brooding!” 

“I am in the family way,” said one. “I have a great longing; 
for human flesh. I shall tear her out and make a meal of her soft 
body.” 

“We shall strangle her and report to Raavana that she died of 
grief,” said another. “The King is lost in unavailing grief because 
of this obstinate woman. Once he knows that she is dead, he will 
forget all about her and sleep soundly.” 

Another said: “I long to eat her liver. It must be very tasty. 

Another added decisively: “Let us kill her and share her limbs* 
Fetch some sauce and strong liquor. Let us feast on her and drink 
and dance in the temple of Nikumbhila.” 



214 


RAAMAAYANA 


Hearing these horrible words and seeing these terrible forms, 
Seeta broke down and cried aloud. Her physical courage failed 
and nature had its way. She sobbed like a child; but even in her 
sobs her mind was clear and it was fixed on Raama. 

“In Janasthaana Raama destroyed thousands of Raakshasas. 
Why does not Raama come yet to redeem me? The warriror princes 
who killed Viraadha in Dandaka, why are they still indifferent to 
my fate? It could only be that they do not yet know where I am ! 
Jataayu, the vulture king, was slain by the Raakshasa. If he at least 
were alive, he would have told them the news that he saw the Raakshasa 
carrying me. But he gave up his life in trying to save me. 

“But how long will Raama remain ignorant of my being here? 
How long can Lanka and the Raakshasas survive? It is certain 
that, in every house in this city, Raakshasa widows will soon be lament¬ 
ing loudly. It is certain that this city of Raavana and the whole 
Raakshasa race will perish.” 

Thus she thought within herself and slowly recovered courage. 
But soon again other thoughts came to her and filled her with gloom. 

“Could it be that Raama gave up his life, unable to bear my 
loss? It might well be so. Otherwise, could he neglect me and 
leave me all alone these so many days? Indeed he is happy now 
and with the Gods. 

“I must have been guilty of many sins to be thus left to suffer. 
My heart must be made of stone. How else can I suffer all this 
and yet survive? Yet something tells me that Raama is alive— 
else I should be dead !” 

Then again another thought occurred to her. “Perhaps he has 
resolved to spend his life in penance and has laid aside all thought 
of me. No, no. How could a warrior forsake his duty and, leaving 
his wife in the hands of his foe, take up the life of sanyasal How 
foolish of me even to think of this! The fact is that they do not 
know where I am. 

“Could it be that Raama has lost his love for me? ‘Out of 
sight, out of mind,’ they say. Could it be that he has forgotten me? 
Fie, fie ! What a sinful thought ! How can my Raama forget me ? 
He never can. And what wrong have I committed that he should 
cease to think of me? This cannot be the reason. Perhaps Raavana 
has played some trick and treacherously slain the Prince.” 

Thus her mind wandered from one sad thought to another and 
sank ever deeper in the sea of sorrow. She decided that it was best to 
put an end to her life. She could gain deliverance, she thought, by 
hanging herself. She could hang herself with her long braid of hair 
round her neck and jump down from a branch of the Simsupa tree. 



FIRST AMONG THE ASTUTE 


215 


Having failed in their attempt to persuade Seeta, the Raakshasis 
did not know what to do next. Some went to inform Raavana of 
their failure. Some stayed behind to look after Seeta. 

Appearing among them, Trijata, a Raakshasi , reprimanded them, 
saying : ‘O foolish ones, you are talking nonsense! Listen to me, 1 
shall tell you of a dream that 1 dreamt. The time has come when 
Lanka shall be destroyed.” 

Then she proceeded to recount in detail the terrible dream that 
she had dreamt. 

“I saw in my dream Raama, shining like a sun, come to Lanka 
to find Seeta. I saw Raavana entering the abode of Yama. I saw 
Raama mounting Seeta on his elephant and carrying her home. I saw 
Raavana and all the Raakshasas , clad in soiled garments and dragged 
away by Yama.” 

Relating this dream to the Raakshasis , Trijata warned them: 
“Don’t persecute this saintly woman. Don’t seek your own destruc¬ 
tion. Fall at her feet and beg for grace.” 

Even as Trijata was speaking to her companions, Seeta, who 
resolved to slay herself, suddenly began to see many good omens. 

Her left eye-lids, hand and foot throbbed auspiciously. A vague 
courage once again came into her heart. All ideas of self-destruction 
disappeared. 

Hanumaan, sitting hidden above and watching all that happened 
in the grove, wondered what he should do next. 

One might imagine that having reached Lanka and seen Seeta, 
Hanumaan had nothing more to do. But he was not so easily satisfied. 
He thought within himself. 

“I have done something which no one else could do, 1 have 
crossed the sea and discovered Seeta. I have seen the city of the 
Raakshasas and noted its defences. All that a spy can do without 
revealing himself to the foe, I have done. But the situation here is 
fraught with danger. If I go back now to report what I have seen 
to Raama and my king, who knows what meanwhile will happen 
here? Before Raama, Lakshmana and the Vaanara host arrive 
here, Seeta, unable to bear her suffering, might put an end to her 
life. All my labours would then be lost. It is not enough to have 
seen Seeta. I must talk to her, give her news of Raama and put 
hope and courage into her heart, so that she may hold with life in spite 
of all. 

“How would Raama receive me if I return without speaking to 
Seeta? I must find some way of speaking to Seeta.” 

In the rosary of Hanumaan’s names occurs the title, Buddhi* 
mataam Varishtham , ‘First among the Astute*. It is a true description. 



216 


RAAMAAYANA 


“In what form should I appear before Seeta? In what language 
should I speak to her? If suddenly a monkey came and spoke to 
her in this Asoka grove, Seeta would surely suspect foul play and 
imagine that Raavana was playing some new trick on her. If I 
appeared suddenly before her, she might cry out in fear. In her 
present condition this is most likely to happen. The Raakshasis 
guarding her, who have now fallen asleep, will be startled awake 
and discover me. They would know that I have come from their 
enemy and in disguise, and they would bring the Raakshasas to attack 
me. A great battle would ensue. Of course I shall slay most of 
them, but the task of comforting Seeta and bearing news of her to 
Raama would be jeopardised if I were to be captured and held a 
prisoner here. This would never do. Even if I escape being caught 
and come out successful in the struggle, I might be wounded and 
lose strength and be unable to cross the sea. What then would I have 
gained having seen Seeta? One should never do things in a hurry. 
One should keep in mind one’s main business. King Sugreeva and 
Raama are confidently awaiting my return. Even a little fault on 
my part now may lead to great disaster. 

“The first thing to do is to get speech with Seeta and put joy 
and hope in her heart. I must approach her in such a way that shie 
can never for a moment entertain a doubt about my good faith. 

“Well, I shall recite in a sweet low tone, and for her hearing only, 
the story and virtues of Raama. Her heart would then be filled with 
joy and trust, displacing suspicion. Only thus can I proceed.” 

So he thought and, still hidden by the branches of the tree, he 
began to utter in a low voice, the sweet words, “Raama,” “Raama/* 


CHAPTER LH 

SEETA COMFORTED 

Hidden by the branches, Hanumaan sang in a sweet and gentle 
voice the story of Raama so that it fell on Seeta’s ears: 

“King Dasaratha ruled his kingdom well. His army was mighty 
And comprised of chariots, elephants and horses. He was virtuous 
and a doer of great deeds. He kept his word and was foremost 
among the famous kings of the world. He was equal to the rishis 
in virtue and to Indra in statesmanship. He hated no one and harmed 
no one. Ail his endeavours were crowned with success. Therefore 
cnen called him Satya-paraakrama, truly valiant. The richest of 



SEETA COMFORTED 


217 


the Ikshvaaku race, a king of kings, the ruler of the world, he enjoyed 
and communicated happiness. The eldest of his four sons was* 
Raamachandra, whose face was like the full moon. Wise, virtuous 
and a master of the bow, Raama was beloved of all. And he was 
full of kindness for all the people in the kingdom, a warrior wedded 
to dharma . He was the heir to the throne. And yet, to preserve 
the honour of his father, he left the kingdom with his wife Seeta and 
his brother Lakshmana and lived in the forest. 

“There he vanquished the Raakshasas and protected the rishis ► 
He destroyed Khara and Dooshana and their mighty army. Coming 
to hear of this, Raavana, bent on revenge, induced a Raakshasa 
to assume the form of a deer and beguile the princes in pursuit and,, 
in their absence, carried off Seeta by force. 

“Grief-struck Raama went in search of Seeta. He met Sugreeva* 
the Vaanara , and made friends with him. Raama slew Vaali, the 
Vaanara king, and secured to his brother Sugreeva the Vaanara king¬ 
dom. And Sugreeva sent his Vaanara warriors to all the quarters 
of the globe to find out where Seeta was. 

“These Vaanara warriors, who could assume what shape they 
would, searched the whole world for the missing Seeta. Following 
a clue given by Sampaati, I crossed the sea a hundred yojanaas broad, 
and have come here. And now I see one whose form, complexion 
and qualities are those described to me by Raama as his royal spouse’s.’* 

Having said this, Hanumaan paused. 

These sweet words, uttered by someone from somewhere, filled 
Seeta with wonder and delight. She looked around in all directions 
to discover who conveyed such sweet matter in so sweet a voice and 
in such exquisite language. 

She looked round, and up and down, but found no human form 
to match this perfect speech. She only saw a lovely little monkey 
seated on the branch above her. 

Seeta saw the son of Vaayu, the wise minister of the Vaanara 
king in the form of a little monkey, radiant like the rising sun. 

The reader should imagine for himself the joy of Raama’s messen¬ 
ger, as Seeta’s eyes fell on him. The reader who experiences this joy 
will find God in his heart. Naaraayana, who is waiting eagerly to 
enter and take possession of our hearts, would leave the great and 
boundless ocean of milk and come to dwell within us, when we cleanse 
ourselves of sinful thoughts. 

Seeing Hanumaan, Seeta said to hereself: “The words I heard* 
the form I see,—they cannot be real. I am only dreaming. One 
sees in one’s dream what one is constantly brooding over. How- 
often has my mind dwelt on the story of my Lord! Is it any wonder 



21* 


RAAMAAYANA 


then that I seem to hear the tale as told by some one ? It is not real, 
•it is only a dream. 

“They say that if one sees a monkey in a dream, it forebodes 
evil to one’s kinsfolk. May God protect Raama from harm ! May 
God keep all harm away from Lakshmana ! May God bless ail 
my kinsfolk in Mithila ! 

“No, no, this is no dream. My eyes are open and I see the 
same form still seated above me. There it is, clear and solid. No, 
this is no dream. And I am not asleep. How can one dream without 
sleeping? This is no dream. All this is real. Oh Gods ! Could 
this indeed be a messnger from my dear Lord ? Oh grant that it 
be so ! Oh Vaachaspati ! master of speech, I salute you. Oh Agni ! 
I salute you. Oh Swayambhu ! I salute you. Oh Gods ! protect 
me. May this be Raama’s messenger ! ” 

Hanumaan, radiant with the joy of seeing Seeta, descended to 
the ground and stood before her, palms joined and head bent in 
salutation. 

And he said in a deep soothing voice: “Mother, tears are 
falling from your eyes like drops from lotus petals. May I know 
who you are, who stands there, leaning on the tree trunk, face clouded 
with sorrow and eyes wet with tears ? Are you a goddess or a Naaga 
maiden? The radiance of your body makes me question whether 
you could be of merely terrestrial birth ! Are you Rohini separated 
for a while from the Moon-god ? Or are you Arundhati parted from 
from sage Vasishtha? 

“No, on closer observation, you seem to be a human woman, 
—may be a princess adorable in your distress. Please tell me who 
indeed you are. May God bless you! Are you the princess Seeta 
carried off by Raavana from Janasthaana? Is mine the bliss of seeing 
Seeta, the beloved of Raama? ” 

Seeta was beside herself with joy. “My child,” she said. “Indeed 
I am Seeta, daughter of the king of Videha and Sri Raamachandra’s 
spouse. For twelve years I enjoyed all happiness with him in Ayodhya, 
In the thirteenth year. King Dasaratha made preparations to crown 
my husband! Then Kaikeyi, his youngest wife reminded him of 
boons he had granted long ago, and demanded that in redemption 
of his word he should crown her son Bharata king, and exile Raama 
to the forest. She threatened to kill herself if this was not done. 
Bound by promise, the king had to yield to her insistence. At his 
bidding Raama relinquished the crown and betook himself to the 
forest not only without regret but happy that it was given to him to 
enable his father to keep his plighted word. I refused to be left 
behind and insisted on going with my lord into the forest. Even 



SEETA COMPORTED 


2\9 


before me, Lakshmana had put on bark-garments, determined to 
accompany his brother to the forest and serve him. The three of us 
entered the forest and were living in Dandaka. One day the evil- 
hearted Raavana carried me off by force. And he has kept me a 
prisoner here in this Asoka garden. Of the time-limit of twelve 
months he has set for me, only two more months remain. When 
they are over I shall end my life.” 

Thus spoke the helpless princess in her sorrow. 

The speeches of Hanumaan and of Jaanaki are sung by Vaalmeeki 
in two brief chapters. As Hari appeared before the emperor Bali 
in the form of Vaamana and measured the universe in two steps, 
so Vaalmeeki has given the tale of Raama in a short recital by Hanu¬ 
maan and another by Seeta. What greater joy can we have than 
reading Hanumaan and Seeta telling the divine story themselves ? 
As Vaamana got the better of Bali and saved him from his ahankaara, 
may this tale of Raama as told by Hanumaan and Seeta rid us of the 
sense of T and ‘my*. 

Seeta concluded her story with the statement that two more months 
remained of the allotted twelve-month term and that her life would 
then end. To Seeta overwhelmed by grief, Hanumaan spoke words 
of comfort. 

“O princess ofVideha! Raama, the noblest of men and the mighti¬ 
est of warriors, has sent me to you with good news. His beloved 
brother Lakshmana, ever anxious for your welfare, sends through 
me his salutations to you.” 

“Ah! what happiness is mine!” she exclaimed. “I now see the 
truth of the common saying that so long as life lasts there is hope.” 

Thus between these two utter strangers a profound confidence 
and affection sprang up like the sudden blossoming of the paarijaato 
in Indra’s garden. Yet when in his joyful eagerness to console and 
encourage Seeta, Hanumaan took a nearer step towards her, Seeta 
lost the confidence inspired by his words and again grew suspicious. 
She shut her eyes and moved away further from the tree. Hanumaan, 
noticing this, withdrew respectfully and stood with hands clasped in 
obeisance. 

“I have been deceived,” she cried. “You are no other than Raa¬ 
vana. Once you came disguised as an ascetic and imposed on me. 
Now you have come again in another disguise and speak sweet words. 
AD this wiD bring you no good. Why do you torture me, O Raavana ? 
I am weary and full of sorrow. You call yourself a warrior. Is* it 
a warrior’s part to persecute a helpless woman?” 

Then she opened her eyes and thought again: “No, no. Ttus 
cannot be Raavana. Trust and friendship spring in my heart at the 



220 


RAAMAAYANA 


sight of him. He can be no ememy of mine. It is wrong to suspect 
him.” 

She addressed him saying: “O Vaanaral Are you indeed a mes¬ 
senger sent by Raama? May God bless you! Tell me more concerning 
Raama. Let my ears hear and my heart rejoice.” 

Then once again doubts assailed her. “Am I a victim of delusion, 
imagining good news? Is this a dream that mocks me with the illusion 
of joy to make my despair blacker when I am awake? Am I in my 
Tight senses? Of course, I am. My thoughts, my words, are all normal. 
T am sane and sensible. But then he says that be crossed the sea a 
hundred yojanaas broad. No, no. This cannot be true. He is 
Raavana and none else.” 

So she concluded in her mind and without lifting her eyes to look 
at Hanumaan sat apart in silence. 

Hanumaan understood her doubts and fears. They were na¬ 
tural in one who had been deceived by the Raakshasa. He thought 
for a while and realised that the only approach to her confidence was 
to awaken hope and joy in her sorely tired heart by extolling Raama 
and harping on the certainty of her rescue, and his victory. 

And he began: “Raama has sent me, Raama radiant like the 
Sun, Raama pleasant to look at like the Moon, Raama praised by all 
the rulers of the earth, Raama valiant like Vishnu, Raama wise like 
Brihaspati, Raama handsome like Manmatha the god of love, Raama 
whose words are ever sweet and true, Raama whose indignation is 
'ever righteous and well-directed, Raama peerless warrior, Raama has 
sent me. 

“While a Raakshasa in the shape of a deer beguiled Raama and 
drew him away in the forest, you were left alone and Raavana carried 
you off by force. Soon he will pay dearly for this evil deed. You 
will see it with your own eyes. Soon the shafts of Raama and Laksh- 
mana will strike Lanka and destroy it along with Raavana and all 
his race. At Raama’s bidding have I come to you to learn abo^it 
your safety which is his constant concern. On Lakshrffana’s behalf 
I place at your feet his respectful salutations. And so too homage 
from Sugreeva, the Vaanara king. Raama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva 
are ever thinking of you. It is my good fortune to have seen you alive. 
Now there will be no more of loss of time. Soon Raama, Lakshmana 
and Sugreeva, accompanied by the whole Vaanara army, will descend 
■on Lanka. I am Sugreeva’s minister. My name i* Hanumaan. I 
crpssed the sea and reached Lanka. You may take it that my foot 
is already on the head of the evil-minded Raavana. By Raama’s 
grace, even more than by my own prowess, have I, his servant, 
crossed the sea to behold you. Do not suspect me. Have faith 



SEETA COMFORTED 


221 


in my words, mother.” So said Hanumaan with tears in his eyes. 

These sweet words of Hanumaan acting on her great love for 
Raama and confidence in him, put an end to Seeta’s fears and gave 
her courage and faith. 

“Forgive my suspicion, O Vaanara friend,” she said. “Deceived 
by the Raakshasa and surrounded by his artifices, I am prone to need¬ 
less fear. O friend and messenger of Raama! How did you first 
meet Raama? How did the Prince make friends with the Vaanaras! 
Tell me all”. 

To confirm her faith, Hanumaan recounted once again the virtues 
and attractive qualities of Raama and Lakshmana., 

He said: “What wonder is there in Raama becoming friends 
with me and my king and the Vaanaras when the whole world lives 
and finds bliss by his loving kindness?” 

He proceeded to describe fully how the quarrel arose between 
Vaali and Sugreeva, how the latter first met Raama and Lakshmana, 
how they became friends, how Raama promised to slay Vaali and 
secure the Vaanara kingdom for Sugreeva, how the Vaanaras had 
picked up and preserved the jewels dropped by Seeta, how with moun¬ 
ting sorrow Raama recognised them, how Vaali was slain and Sugreeva 
crowned, how after the rainy season was over the Vaanara hosts 
searched the whole world for Seeta, how the party led by Angada and 
proceeding south having failed to find her, decided to fast to death, 
how they met Sampaati and received a clue from him, how he, 
Hanumaan, crossed the sea and searched the inner apartments of 
Raavana-—all this he recounted. 

At the end of the narration he placed in her hand Raama’s signet 
ring that he had brought. 

Seeta recived the ring and pressed it to her eyes with joy. Now 
all fear of Raavana’s deceit and Raakshasa^nsigic was over. She had 
complete faith in Hanumaan and infinite affection for him. 

“My child!” she said, “how foolish was my error! How could 
I suspect one like you?” 

The son of Vaayu explained to her who he was and who his father 
was and what his own might was. 

“Though I, who enjoy the grace of my father Vaayu, should 
not sing my own praises, I do so now to end your sorrow. Soon the 
Vaanara warriors will be here to destroy the Raakshasas and their 
kingdom. I must first return and tell them where you are.” 

And then he described Raama’s desolation in being parted from 
Seeta, and the ascetic life he led, and Seeta’s heart melted in loving 
sorrow. 

Seeta forgot her own suffering thinking of Raama’s grief. 



CHAPTER LHI 


SEETA AND HANUMAAN 

“Dear, dear Vaanara friend,” said Seeta, “I do not know whether to 
rejoice or grieve at the news you have brought. Your words are 
like nectar mixed with poison. My lord’s love for me is sweetest 
nectar, and his grief over my plight is bitterest poison.” Thus Seeta 
spoke what she felt and found comfort in putting in words her love 
and her grief. 

Pleasure and pain, happiness and misery alternately impel human 
beings. Seeta was consoled but also pained by the thought that 
Raama had not forgotten her, but was thinking of her, grieving and 
searching for her. 

“We are puppets manipulated by the twin strings of joy and 
sorrow,” said Seeta. “None of us can escape their pull. My lord 
and Lakshmana and myself are all subject to this law. You say my 
lord suffers like a sailing ship caught in a storm on the high seas. O! 
When will he come here? Dear Vaanara friend, when will he destroy 
Lanka and Raavana and the other Raakshasasl All this must take 
place within the two months’ time still left. Please explain this to 
my lord. Only two months remain to me. Vibheeshana, the younger 
brother of Raavana, tried his best to persuade the latter to change 
his ways. ‘Return Seeta,’ he said to Raavana, ‘and save Lanka and 
the Raakshasa race.’ All his words have gone in vain. My heart 
is strong within me. I know Raavana is on the road to the abode of 
Yama. Soon my lord will vanquish his foes and redeem me. I have 
no doubt about this. My innocent heart tells me this and it cannot 
prove false.” 

Thus Seeta went on speaking with tears in her eyes. Hanumaan 
could not bear the sight of her suffering. 

“Mother!” he exclaimed, “I shall go at once and bring back 
Raama. He will descend on Lanka with a mighty army. But why 
should you suffer any longer? If you are agreeable, sit on my back 
and I shall carry you across the ocean and restore you in a moment 
to Raama. Do not for a moment doubt my ability to do this! As 
Agni carries the sacred offerings to Indra, so shall I transport you to 
my Lord Raama. Permit me, O pure of heart, to do this service. I 
can not only carry you and restore you to Raama, but I have the power 
to wrench Lanka from its foundations and throw it and its ruler at 
Raama’s feet! Sit on my back now and, Hke Rohini rejoining the 
Moon, you will rejoin Raama. As I sprang and came here, so shall 
I spring and reach the other shore with you.” 



SEETA AND HANUMAAN 


223 


Thus Hanumaan went on speaking out of his affection and en¬ 
thusiasm. And Seeta wondered how the little monkey before her 
could hope to carry her across the ocean. 

Hanumaan saw her doubt and so, to demonstrate his powers, 
he jumped off from the platform and began to grow big in size. Seeta 
was pleased. 

But she said: “O Son ofVaayu! I realise your strength and yet 
it is not right that you should carry me. On the way the Raakshasas 
are sure to intercept and challenge you. They will hurl their weapons 
at you. Your care will be to guard me. You will not be able to fix 
all your mind on the battle and that may be a serious set-back to the 
strongest warrior. In a battle, one cannot be certain of victory and 
what would be my fate if you should fall? And besides, in the violent 
convulsions of a heady fight, how could I be sure of maintaining my 
position on your back? I may slip and fall into the sea. It is clear, 
therefore, that you should not try to cross the sea with me. Apart 
from that, Hanumaan, if you snatch me away stealthily from the 
Raakshasas it would be no credit to the valour of my lord. The honour 
of the Kshatriya race demands that he should come and fight and 
vanquish Raavana and redeem me as the prize of victory. Would 
Raama have me stolen back even as Raavana stole me from him? No, 
my son, return and quickly bring Raama here with Lakshmana and 
the Vaanara army . Let my lord’s arrows destroy Lanka and send 
Raavana to Yama’s abode. His victory is certain. Like the fierce 
sun at the hour of doom, Raama’s arrows will burn the Raakshasa 
people to ashes.” 

“You are right,” said Hanumaan, “I shall return alone. But 
what shall I tell Raama? What sign shall I carry of my having met 
you and talked with you?” 

Hearing these words, all her happy life with Raama came like a 
flood to her memory and her eyes were filled with tears. If she told 
Hanumaan and Hanumaan told Raama some intimate happenings 
known only to herself and her lord, it would be proof of Hanu¬ 
maan having seen her and also make Raama see her present discon¬ 
solate state. With flowing tears, she recounted incidents of their forest 
life. 

“Once in Chitrakoota my lord and I wandered about in the grove 
beside the river and became weary and rested on the ground. He 
laid his head upon my lap and fell asleep. While thus, a crow came 
down and hungrily pecked at my bosom. I drove it off, but again 
and again it returned and troubled me. I then flung a pebble at it 
But even that had no effect. Raama was roused from slumber and 
saw me thus troubled and weeping in pain. At first when he saw 



224 


RAAMAAYANA 


what the matter was and found it was but a crow, he was inclined to 
laugh at my discomfiture. But he saw the bruise the crow had made 
and discovered that the bird was really an Asura. The bird flew for 
its life, but Raama sped a dart at it which pursued it wherever it went, 
till at last the crow-Asura sought Raama’s feet^for refuge and found 
pardon there. 

“Tell him of this incident. O Hanumaan, I cannot wait for many 
more days. Tell him to come quickly and save me.” 

Again she was in tears as she said: “On another occasion we 
were both wandering all alone in the forest. I was tired. Perspira¬ 
tion had washed off the tilaka on my forhead. My lord playfully 
plucked a pinch of red mineral from the rock and applied it between 
my brows with his own sweet hands. Ask him if he remembers this 
incident.” 

As she went on recalling happy memories of the past the weight 
of her present sorrow overwhelmed her and she wept and said: 

“What should I tell Raama? What is there that he does not 
know? Does he need my words to rouse his indignation? Only tell 
my lord that I embrace his feet. That is enough. There is Lakshmana 
beside him, the brother bom to serve him and of unrivalled skill 
in arms. Looking at his sweet face, my Lord even forgot his grief 
for the father’s death. The pure-hearted hero, dear Lakshmana 
parted from his own mother and came away with us and regard¬ 
ed me as his mother. Tell him he should come and end my 
suffering.” 

As she thought of Lakshmana’s heroism and devoted loyalty, 
Seeta’s eyes were filled with tears. When Raama had gone chasing 
the golden deer, did she not insult him and fling burning words at this 
selfless and devoted friend? The thought of this injustice filled her 
repentant heart with insufferable pain. 

She was unwilling to part from Hanumaan, who had come to her 
and consoled her just as she was about to put an end to her life. At 
the same time, she wanted him to return quickly to Raama and give 
him news concerning her. 

At last she said: “My child, here is the jewel given by my mother 
at my wedding and fixed on my forehead by the late Emperor. Take 
it and give it to my husband as a sign from me.” 

So saying, she untied a knot at the corner of her sari, took out 
the divine jewel and handed it to Hanumaan, who received it with 
humble reverence. 

When Hanumaan had the jewel in his hand, pride and joy filled 
his mind. 

His heart was far away with Raama. Mentally he had recahed 



SEETA AND HANUMAAN 


225 


Raama’s presence and conveyed the glad message of his discovery. 
Only his body now stayed in Lanka. 

“Dear friend,” said Seeta, “you must tell Raama ail you have 
learnt here, and it will be your good fortune to help him to achieve 
victory.” 

As Hanumaan was about to leave, Seeta spoke again: “Dear 
Hanumaan, convey my affection to the Prince and also to king Su- 
greeva and the other Vaanara leaders. Tell them from me that 1 im¬ 
plore them to give help to Raama to save me from this sea of sorrow. 
You, more than anyone else 1 hope, will encourage and show the way 
to the Prince in all matters.” 

Hanumaan answered: “Lay aside your sorrow, dear princess. 
Raama, Lakshmana and the Vaanara army will descend on Lanka, 
destroy the Raakshasas and redeem you. Have no doubt.” 

As he was about to go, Seeta said again: “Should you not stay 
here somewhere, for a while, and rest? Should you return at once? 
Your visit has given me such great consolation and made me forget 
my grief for a while. When you leave, I shall sink again in my sea of 
sorrow. You came here crossing the great ocean. How will Raama 
and the big army cross it? Have you thought of that?” Doubts 
assailed her once again. 

“Have no doubt, my queen!” said Hanumaan. “Do you think 
I am the only Vaanara that could cross the sea? There is not a Vaanara 
but has more power and skill than L Not only Sugreeva, but many 
in his army can fly round the world. What is this narrow sea to them? 
There are thousands among us who can roam in the sky. Have no 
doubt whatever. Do you think they would send the best among them 
as a mere messenger? Dear lady, have done with sorrow, for you will 
soon see me with the two mighty princes on my back. They will lay 
waste this city with their arrows. They will destroy Raavana and all 
his race. You have as good as crossed the ocean of sorrow and reach¬ 
ed the other shore. 

“God bless you. In a few days you will see the two princes 
standing, bow in hand, at the gates of Lanka, destroying the Raakshasa 
host. You will see the Vaanara army leaping with joy over the ruined 
city. 

“Once they hear the news from me, they will not delay a moment. 

I have only to tell them and they will start at once. Do not lose 
heart” Saying this and bowing profoundly, Hanumaan prepared 
to go. 

“Tell Raama and Lakshmana that ! am alive,” cried Seeta. 
“See that no time is lost. May God bless you.” 

And Hanu m aan left. Let us meditate with reverence on the 



226 


RAAMAAYANA 


heroic son of Anjanaa, the wise messenger who gave consolation to 
Seeta and quenched her grief. 


CHAPTER LIV 

INVITING BATTLE 

After taking leave of Seeta, Hanumaan sat for a while on the top of 
the garden wall and began to think: 

“What can I do to put courage into Seeta and some fear into 
Raavana and his friends to shake their arrogant confidence? It would 
be good to leave them some souvenir of my visit, some indication 
of what the future has in store for them. 

“It is clear I must instil some fear into Raavana to prevent him 
from troubling Seeta in the meantime; fear is the only argument they 
understand. Raavana has untold wealth and one cannot part his 
friends from him. Hence saama (conciliation), daana (buying over) 
and bheda (sowing discord) are useless in this case. I should there¬ 
fore do something terrible to frighten them, and warn them not to ill- 
treat Seeta. Yes, I must do this before I go away.” 

At once he began to grow and assumed a huge form and began to 
lay waste the grove. Trees fell cracking to the ground, bowers col¬ 
lapsed, tanks and artificial hills were disfigured and destroyed. The 
beautiful Asoka park soon became a mass of ruin from which the deer 
and the birds fled in fear. The slumbering Raakshasis woke up and 
were bewildered to see this unaccountable sight. 

Hanumaan sat on the top of the wall of the garden, a huge figure 
of wrathful menace, waiting for the answer to his challenge. The 
Raakshasis quaked with terror at the sight of this stranger and some 
ran to tell Raavana the news. Some approached Seeta and asked: 
“How did this huge monkey come here? You should know who he is. 
Did he say anything to you? Tell us the truth. Do not be afraid to 
speak out.” 

“How do I know what can happen in this charmed world of 
RaakshasasT ’ Seeta answered, parrying the question, “This mon¬ 
key is probably one of the Raakshasas and you are likely to know 
more about him than I.” 

The Raakshasis fled in fear from the park and reported to Raavana 
what had happened. 

“ O king! A huge monkey terrible to look at has laid waste the 
royal garden. It was in secret talk with Seeta,” 



THE TERRIBLE ENVOY 


227 


Of course they omitted to add that they had fallen asleep and 
given a chance for Seeta to talk to the monkey. 

“We tried our best to get some information from Seeta,” they 
added. “We asked her who he was, and how he came there, and 
what he told her. But she refuses to answer. You should seize and 
slay this creature. Do send a strong force. The beautiful grove is 
completely devastated except for the Simsupa tree under which Seeta 
is seated. Its spreading branches have suffered no damage. The 
monkey which laid waste the tanks and bowers has spared the habita¬ 
tion of Seeta. There must be a reason for this. We suspect that this is 
not an ordinary wild animal. It must have been sent by some enemy 
of yours, either Indra or Kubera. Or could it have anything to do 
with Raama? How did this monkey dare to talk to Seeta? He must 
be a messenger from Raama. Do send your warriors to capture this 
terrible beast.” 

Raavana was furious on hearing that his favourite park, set apart 
for his queens, had been destroyed. His eyes glowed like twin torches 
and hot tears rolled down from them like drops of burning oil. 

He turned to the bodyguards standing beside him ever eager to 
do his bidding and ordered them at once to go and destroy the mon¬ 
ster-monkey. A strong force started to execute the king’s commands, 
armed with maces and spears and other weapons. 


CHAPTER LV 

THE TERRIBLE ENVOY 

The Raakshasa warriors saw with amazement a mighty Vaanara seated 
on the garden gate, who at their approach grew to still bigger size and 
formidable menace. 

“Oh! You have come, have you?” he said and, jumping down* 
brandished his tail, and striking the ground with it, roared till the four 
quarters shook, He snatched the huge iron bar from the gate and, 
armed with this weapon, began to attack them all. 

He sprang and leaped in all directions and, whirling the iron rod, 
struck the Raakshasas down, one by one. After finishing them thus, 
he resumed his seat on the top of the pillared entrance, and roared 
once again. 

“Long live Raama! Long live Lakshmana!” he loudly pro¬ 
claimed. “Long live King Sugreeva! Oh! Ye Raakshasas of Lpnka, 
your doom is near. The great warriors Raama and Lakshmana and 
King Sugreeva have sent me here to destroy you. Come on in your 



228 


RAAMAAYANA 


thousands. I stand here ready to hurl you to destruction. I have 
saluted Seeta and received her blessings. And now I am going to 
destroy your city!” 

All Lanka heard the thunder of his words and quaked in terror. 
When the news reached Raavana that the warriors sent against Ha- 
numaan were all slain, he opened wide his fierce eyes in amazement 
and wrath. 

“What is it you say?” he yelled, and called Jambumaali, the 
matchless warrior, son of Prahasta. And he said to him : “Go at 
once! Punish this monkey and report to me.” 

The Raakshasa Jambumaali took some time to put on armour 
and to take up weapons and get ready to meet his foe. Meanwhile, 
Hanumaan was not sitting still. He climbed to the top of a temple 
in the park and stood there, shining against the horizon like a second 
sun suddenly risen in the sky. He magnified his body still further and 
looked like a golden mountain-range up in the heavens. 

His roar filled the city of Lanka and raised echoes from all the 
eight quarters. The hearts of the Raakshasas trembled in fear. 

“Long live Raama! Long live Lakshmana! Long live King Su~ 
greeva! I have come as an envoy of the King of Kosala. I have come 
to destroy Lanka. I am Hanumaan, son of Vaayu, come here to 
utterly destroy the enemies of Raama. I have vowed before Seeta 
and received her blessing. Know that I possess the strength to vanquish 
a thousand Raavanas. Big boulders and uprooted trees I shall aim 
at the Raakshasas and destroy them. That is what I have come here 
for!” 

The sentries in the temple took up various weapons and attacked 
him. Hanumaan jumped down and plucked up a big pillar, supporting 
the temple, and stood there like the Destroyer. Whirling his massive 
weapon easily as though it were a willow wand, Hanumaan struck 
down and slew the sentries. The temple, from which the pillar had 
been removed, collapsed. As Hanumaan struck the ground with the 
pillar, sparks of fire flew all around. 

“In Sugreeva’s army there are monkeys much mightier than I and 
they will soon be here,” he roared. “You and your king and your 
city will be destroyed by them, root and branch. Your king has in* 
curred the enmity of the Lord of the ikshvaakti race, has he not? 
Lanka is nearing Its end. Destruction awaits the Raakshasas . The 
god of Death is approaching Raavana.” i 

Jambumaali arrived at last. With wide, glaring eyes and ugly. 
Irregular teeth, dressed in scarlet, with large golden rings in his ears, 
bow in hand, garland round his neck, swordi at his hip, he came in 
a chariot rattling like thunder. 



THE TERRIBLE ENVOY 


229 


Hanumaan set eyes on the chariot dragged by enormous mules. 
And he got ready. 

Seated in his chariot, Jambumaali bent his bow and aimed a few 
arrows at Maaruti who was seated on the wall. They wounded his 
face and drew blood, which added to the beauty of his face. It was 
as if a red lotus had suddenly blossomed in the heavens. The wounds 
enraged Hanumaan, who picked up a big boulder and flung it at the 
chariot. 

He uprooted a sal tree and, twirling it, flung it at Jambumaali. 
Then he plucked out a huge iron rod from the temple and aimed it at 
the chariot and reduced it to splinters and crushed the huge body of 
Jambumaali into a shapeless mass, in which neither head nor limbs 
could be distinguished. 

The issue of this battle was duly reported to Raavana. He was 
struck with wonder. “This is indeed something strange,” he said to 
himself. “This murderous brute is not an animal, certainly not a 
mere monkey. It is some new creature devised by my old enemies 
the gods to annoy me.” 

And he ordered mighty commanders to go with a great army to 
capture the creature and produce it before him. 

The Raakshasa chiefs went forth in a great array of chariots. In 
full force they attacked Hanumaan, who was as before stationed on 
top of the entrance and was laughing aloud in disdainful unconcern. 
They showered missiles on him which mostly glanced harmlessly off 
his adamantine frame; with each dart or arrow that struck him, he 
grew in stature and fierceness, and ranging all round with energy pelted 
them with rocks and huge tree boles, till all the leaders lay crushed and 
slain, and the survivors fled in panic and despair. 

Having killed or put to flight the entire contingent of Raakshasas , 
Hanumaan roared in triumph and Lanka trembled at the roar. He 
resumed his seat on the stone-battlement on the top of the 
garden-gate. 

Hearing of the defeat of the force sent to capture Hanumaan and 
the slaughter of five of his best commanders, fear for the first time 
entered Raavana*s heart. 

“It is extraordinary that a solitary monkey should haye this 
devastating valour and purposeful malevolence.” Raavana thought 
with anxiety, “This is clearly a conspiracy of the gods.” 

But he kept his concern to himself and laughed derisively. 

He looked round, at all the members of his great council. His 
son the heroic Aksha stood foremost, eager for battle, and the 
jW'oud father bade him go forth to battle against this tremendous 



230 


RAAMAAYANA 


Radiant with youth and health and glowing with high courage 
at this opportunity of distinguishing himself, Aksha went forth in 
a shining chariot, confident of victory. 


CHAPTER LVI 

HANUMAAN BOUND 

Vaalmeeki describes in beautiful verses how the youthful warrior 
Aksha, the equal of the gods, rode to battle in a chariot drawn by 
eight horses. 

Who can put in a different tongue Vaalmeeki's poetry describing 
the beauty of forests and the terrible fury of encounters between war¬ 
riors? The rhythm and grandeur of his words convey the terror and 
majesty of what he describes. This power is Vaalmeeki’s special 
gift. We can only summarise in pedestrian prose his glowing account 
of the battle between Aksha, the beloved son of Raavana, and Hanu- 
maan. 

In a golden chariot acquired through tapasya rode Raavana’s 
young son. When he saw Hanumaan, seated on the stone battlement 
above the gateway and noted approvingly the beautiful symmetry of 
his mighty limbs, and the majestic intrepidity of his look, Aksha felt 
that here was a foe worthy of his steel, and summoned all his 
strength and resolution to do him honour. 

The young warrior aimed three sharp arrows at Hanumaan. 
They struck his body and drew blood. But Maaruti’s strength in¬ 
creased and his face shone with new splendour. He too was pleased 
with the prowess of the youthful Raakshasa. 

Fierce grew the battle between the two. Hundreds of arrows 
rose in clouds into the sky and hit Maaruti. Like rain falling on a 
rock, they fell on Hanumaan’s body. Rising in the air Hanumaan 
dodged adout evading the arrows—slipping as it were through the 
meshes of that deadly network of missiles—and finding a favourable 
opening closed with Aksha. Hanumaan admired Akhsha’s youthful 
promise and heroism, and was sorry to have to slay him, but there was 
no help for it for the prince seemed to get more and more formidable 
as the fight went on, and it was unwise to take chances with him. At 
last Hanumaan hardened his heart and decided to destroy the 
youth. 

He rushed against Aksha’s chariot and broke it to pieces. The 
horses fell dead. The Raakshasa prince stood on the ground chariot* 
less. Nothing daunted, he rose in the air with bow and sword and 



HANUMAAN BOUND 


231 


attacked Hanumaan. A great battle took place in the air. In the end 
Aksha’s bones were crushed and splintered and he fell down dead. 

Hearing that the prince had been killed by Hanumaan, Raavana 
shook with rage, but controlling hifaself he called his son Indrajit, 
the conqueror of Indra. 

“You have mastered all weapons,” he said. “You have van¬ 
quished the Devas and Asuras in battle. You have by your austerities 
called Brahma down and secured from him the Brahmaastra . There is 
none in the world who can oppose you. Fatigue cannot approach 
you. Your knowledge of battle is unique. You have attained 
strength through tapasya . Nothing is impossible for you. None can 
equal you in foresight. The kirtkaras I sent and Jambumaali and the 
five generals of our army, and your dear brother Aksha have all been 
slain by a terrible foe who has raided us in the form of a monkey and 
it is yours now to avenge them. Do not underrate him. It seems he 
cannot be vanquished by weapons. He cannot be brought down in 
wrestling. Consider well therefore what needs to be done. Do it 
and return victorious. The astras you have secured through tapasya 
can serve you at this moment. Without allowing your mind to wander, 
flight with concentration and return triumphant.” 

Indrajit, bright like the gods, accepted his father’s command with 
reverence and receiving his blessings went with courage and eagerness 
towards the Asoka Vana. 

Standing in a chariot drawn by four fierce lions and twanging his 
bow-string, Indrajit proceeded towards Hanumaan. His chariot 
sounded like the wind off the monsoon. His lotus-like eyes shone 
victory. 

As Hanumaan saw the chariot coming towards him, he was filled 
with joy. Indrajit too, skilful in battle, bent his bow and got his 
sharp arrows ready for Hanumaan. Knowing that a great battle 
was at hand, the Naagas, Yakshas and Siddhas assembled in the sky to 
see. 

At the sight of Indrajit Hanumaan roared and increased his stature 
still further. Silently the Raakshasa warrior dispatched his darts. 
Showers of arrows began to descend as in the battle of the gods and 
their cousins, the Asuras. Hanumaan rose in the sky and moving 
with speed like lightning, struck down the sharp arrows. His roar 
made the quarters echo, drowning the drum-beats and the bow-twangs 
of the Raakshasa . 

The battle raged with increasing fury and filled all beholders with 
amazement. In skill and strength the two warriors were perfect 
equals. No matter how often he was wounded, Hanumaan’s strength 
showed no signs of lessening. Indrajit therefore resolved, ‘my arrows, 



232 


RAAMAAYANA 


cannot vanquish this monkey. What my father said is true. He can 
be bound only by using the Brahmaastra.' 

The Raakskasa Prince sent forth the Brahmaastra. At its touch 
the Vaanara warrior lay bound ahd helpless. 

Hanumaan realised what had happened. He said to himself 
‘I have been bound by the Brahmaastra 

Hanumaan too had secured a boon from Brahma, and this he 
now remembered. 

‘This will keep me bound for only one muhoorta (four-fifths of an 
hour),’ he said to himself. ‘I run no real risk. Let me see what the 
Raakshasas do to me while I lie bound and helpless. I might find 
here a further opportunity to function as a messenger.* 

As instructed by Brahma when he gave him the gift of immortality, 
he surrendered himself to the Brahmaastra and lay down on the ground, 
inactive but in full possession of his faculties. 

When they saw Hanumaan thus lying helpless on the ground the 
Raakshasas who till then stood at a distance in fear, surrounded him 
and danced with joy and called him insulting names and praised their 
prince. 

“We shall cut you to pieces!” they shouted. “Let us eat him up.” 
“We shall drag him to the throne of our Raavana!” Thus and in 
many other ways they shouted. 

A few among them feared and said: “This fellow is only pretend¬ 
ing. He may get up suddenly and attack us.” So they brought ropes 
of jute and cocoanut fibre and bound him hard and shouted exultingly: 
“Now we have bound him, let us drag him to the Lord of the 
Raakshasas .” 

Indrajit, who discovered too late and could not prevent this foolish 
mistake of the Raakshasas , felt sad. 

‘Alas!’ he thought with sorrow. ‘They have undone all my work. 
These fools do not know the secrets of supernatural weapons. When 
they have thus used ropes and jute for binding him, the astra withdraws 
its power. The bond of mantra is undone when physical bonds are 
added. Hanumaan is now held only by the ropes which he can burst 
asunder and the Brahmaastra cannot be used a second time.* 

Hanumaan too understood this, and knew he could spring up 
free if he liked, but he welcomed the opportunity to meet and talk to 
Raavana and allowed himself to be dragged to the king, patiently 
bearing all their insults and cruelties in seeming helplessness. They 
belaboured and foully abused him, and dragged him through the 
streets and women and children came out to look at him and jeer. 



CHAPTER LVn 


LANKA IN FLAMES 

Hw captors took him to the court of Raavana and placed him in front 
of the King. Forgetting the pain and insults he had borne, Hanu- 
maan gazed with wrathful curiosity at the gaint monarch. As he 
gazed at him resplendent on his throne a sort of pitying admiration 
of the doomed Raakshasa entered his thoughts. 

Clad in silk of golden hue, with the royal crown on his head, the 
jewels inlaid in it shining brilliantly Raavana sat there, a figure of 
dazzling splendour. The whole court was brilliant with shining gold 
and gems, pearls and silk. His dark body lit up by the marks of 
royalty, looked like a great radiant hill. 

‘Alas!’ thought Hanumaan full of anger, wonder and pity. ‘If 
only this great one had not swerved from the path of dharma not 
even Indra could equal him. What a form, what radiance, what 
strength! Trusting to the boon he had secured, he took to wicked 
ways and has lost his happiness and forfeited his greatness.” 

As Hanumaan was lost in thought thus, Raavana addressed his 
ministers: “Find out from this wicked fellow who he is, where he 
has come from, who has sent him here and why he entered Lanka. 
Tell him to speak truthfully.” 

As ordered by the king, Prahasta questioned Hanumaan. “Do 
not be afraind, monkey! If you speak the truth, you will escape punish¬ 
ment. Did Indra send you here? Or are you Kubera’s servant? 
Whose orders are you carrying out? Speak the truth and save your¬ 
self. Why have you come here thus disguised? Take care you hide 
nothing!” 

Hanumaan, facing Raavana directly, said: 

“Neither Indra, nor Kubera has sent me here. I am a Vaanara. 
I came here to have a look at the Raakshasa king. That was why 
I laid waste the garden. Otherwise I could not get to the king’s pre¬ 
sence. And because they attacked me and tried to kill me, I killed 
them in self-defence. I have come here as the messenger of Sugreeva, 
the Vaanara king. O Raakshasa king, my lord looks on you as a 
brother and sends you his greetings. Raamachandra, the famous son 
of king Dasaratha of Ayodhya, has become a friend of Sugreeva and 
slaying Vaali has made Sugreeva king. When Raamachandra, heir 
to the throne of Ayodhya, was living in the Dandaka forest to fulfil 
his father’s word, his consort who had been left alone for a while, was 
tost and at the behest of Raama and Lakshmana, Sugreeva has sent 
his servants to look for her throughout the world* I cam to Lanka 



234 


RAAMAAYANA 


on this search and here 1 saw the good princess. O lord of the Raa- 
kshasas , I speak to you with the respect due from the messenger of a 
brother king. I speak to you also as a devoted servant of the Prince 
of Ayodhya. You know well it was a cowardly act and totally con¬ 
trary to dharma to carry off the princess Seeta. This is sure to end in 
the destruction of your race if you persist in your wicked folly. Re¬ 
store Seeta to the Prince and seek his forgiveness. Know that Death 
has come to you in the form of Seeta. Do not mistake poison for 
food. It is not wisdom to oppose dharma and run into deadly danger. 
You know well enough that the sin of desiring another’s wife will con¬ 
sume utterly the merit you have earned through tapas and destroy you 
inevitably. Your only recourse now is to seek refuge at Raama’s 
feet. Do not make Raama your enemy and bring about your own 
destruction. The boons you have secured will avail you nothing 
against the Prince of the Raghu race. Consider well and realise the 
danger you are in. Pay heed to the words of this humble messenger 
of the Vaanara king. Turn to the right path and find safety. These 
words from a brother king are true and meant for your welfare.” 

Hanumaan uttered this bitter warning in a loud and clear voice. 
When the Raakshasa king heard it, his eyes grew red with anger, and 
he ordered that Hanumaan should be killed forthwith. 

But Vibheeshana pointed out that it would be improper to kill 
a king’s envoy. 

“According to the law of kings it is not permitted on any account 
to kill envoys and messengers. You can have him mutilated, whip¬ 
ped or branded, but not killed,” so counselled Vibheeshana. 

“What is wrong,” asked Raavana, “in killing one who has sinned 
so greatly?” 

Answered Vibheeshana with due politeness. “No matter how 
grievous his offence, it was done at the bidding of others. To leave his 
royal masters alone and to slay their instrument, a mere messenger— 
what use or sense is there in it ? Let us by all means seek ways of 
punishing those that sent him here. They must be brought here and 
given due punishment. If he is slain now, what chance is there of our 
real enemies being brought here? If, on the other hand, he is sent 
back alive to them, they will come here and attack us. Then they will 
receive proper punishment at your hands.” 

Raavana agreed. “Very well,” he said. “A monkey’s most 
cherished possession is his tail. Set fife to his tail, flog him soundly 
and turn him out.” 

At these words of the Raakshasa king, his servants took Hann- 
maan out. They wrapped his tail in rags of all kinds. His tail grew 
in size and, as it grew, they brought more and mote Old rags and 



LANKA IN FLAMES 


235 


wrapped them round. They soaked the whole in oil and set it ablaze 
like a huge flaming torch. 

Thus bound by ropes and with tail ablaze, Hanumaan was taken 
through the streets of Lanka. 

“Here goes the thief that entered our city!” cried the women and 
children. They jeered at him as he was taken round by the exulting 
Raakshasas to the accompaniment of pipes and drums through all 
the highways and byways of Lanka. 

In the Asoka Vana the Raakshasis told Seeta: “The monkey with 
whom you had secret talk, do you know what has happened to him? 
They have wrapped his tail in cloth soaked in oil and have set fire to it. 
His tail is ablaze. They are taking him in procession through the 
town.” 

They told Seeta the tale and laughed in scorn. 

She kindled a fire and offered a prayer to the god of Fire: “Q 
Agni! If there be any goodness in me, any purity, be cool to Hanu¬ 
maan; do not hurt him.” 

Hanumaan endured the blows and the insults heaped upon him, 
and proceeded from street to street quietly observing everything. The 
Raakshasas , to amuse their women and children took him through 
all the streets and bylanes of the city. And he noted in silence, for 
future use, all the secrets of that fortified city. 

“But what is this miracle?” he thought. “The rags soaked in 
oil burn brightly but the fire does not hurt and is cool on my tail. The 
elements themelves seem kind to one engaged on Raama’s purpose. 
Did not the mountain rise above the sea and offer me hospitality? 
Even so the god of Fire is gracious to me now and does not harm me. 
Or may be, Agni being a friend of my father Vaayu, is gentle with me. 
Now, I think I should not let slip this opportunity which has come to 
me unsought to put the fear of God into these Raakshasas." 

Suddenly he shrank in size and shook off the ropes that bound 
him and resuming his huge shape, jumped with his blazing tail to the 
top of a tall building. He plucked a pillar there and whirled it round, 
striking terror in all beholders. 

Then he jumped from mansion to mansion, setting fire to them. 
In a little while a strong breeze began to blow and the whole city was 
in flames. The Raakshasas and their women and children shouted 
in terror and ran hither and thither. 

“This monkey is no other than Yama,” said some. “No, he 
must be the god Agni," said others. And they all fled from their 
burning houses. 

Recalling the insults he had suffered, Hanumaan was pleased 
when he saw the flames rise. He sat on the summit of the Trikoota 



236 


RAAMAAYANA 


hill and contemplated with satisfaction the red glow of the burning 
city. 

Then he went to the sea and plunging in, put out the fire in his tail 
and came ashore . 

“Alas! Alas! What have I done?” he said with uncontrollable 
grief. ”1 have lost my senses in my rage. What is the use of strength 
and skill and all other gifts, if one cannot control one’s anger? Seeta 
too must have perished in this great conflagration I have raised. My 
angry deed has led to the utter ruin of my whole purpose. Alas, there 
is no fool, no sinner, like me on earth. My rage against the Raa- 
kshasas has ended in the death of Seeta. Here and now 1 must put 
an end to my life and to my shame!” 

Then he heard some voices in the sky. The Chaaranas and Yakshas 
were rejoicing and saying, “What a miracle! Glory be to Hanumaan’s 
prowess! Except the spot where Seeta is, all Lanka is in flames!” 

Hearing this ethereal conversation, Hanumaan was relieved. 
“Seeta has saved herself. She saved me, for it was her purity and 
power that kept the fire from harming me. How can fire help paying 
homage to the goddess of Chastity? What can fire do to fire? This 
fire that I started could not go near Seeta. And is not all this Raama’s 
purpose? Did not the ocean king and Mynaaka mountain come to 
my help?” 

Thinking thus, Hanumaan went straight to the Asoka park again. 
There, under the Simsupa tree, he saw Seeta who was greatly relieved 
to see him alive and cheerful. 

Rejoicing, he bowed before her and said: “Oh mother! I have 
seen you safe and sound. This is your power and my good fortune. 
Now give me leave to go.” 

And Seeta said: “'You are indeed a hero. For you there is nothing 
impossible. See that my lord comes here soon and lays low the 
Raakshasas and redeems me. I depend on you. You alone can 
achieve this.” 

“Be assured,” said Hanumaan. “Sugreeva will soon be here with 
Raama and Lakshmana and the myriads of Vaanaras. Raavana and 
his wicked hordes will perish. The happy Prince will return with 
you to Ayodhya. Grieve no more. God bless you.” 

Thus consoling her, Hanumaan took leave of Seeta. He went 
to the shore of the sea and climbing up the beautiful hill called Arishta, 
rose into the sky. 

On the way he saw Mynaaka eagerly awaiting him* He affection¬ 
ately stroked it with his hand, but did not stop. He flew straight like 
an arrow shot from a bow. At sight of the Mahendra bill be knew 
that he was near the other shore and he roared. 



A CARNIVAL 


237 


The Vaanaras , meanwhile, who saw Hanumaan flying towards 
them likea great eagle across the sky, shouted: “He is come! he is come! 

Till now their hearts had been full of care and their eyes wet. 
Now they jumped in their joy. 

“It is certain he is returning in triumph,*’ said Jaambavaan. “Else 
he would not roar in this manner.” 

They climbed up trees and hills and stood watching with joy the 
approach of Hanumaan returning from Lanka. 

And Hanumaan rejoiced to see the mountains and trees all co¬ 
vered with his friends. Amid their glad uproar, he alighted on the 
Mahendra hill. 


CHAPTER LVIII 

A CARNIVAL 

Beside themselves with joy at the sight of Hanumaan, the Vaanaras 
assembled on the Mahendra peak; and the veteran Jaambavaan wel¬ 
coming the son of Vaayu with great affection, spoke on behalf of all. 

“We are eager to hear a full account of your* journey and its 
triumphant conclusion. More particularly, we are anxious to know 
how you discovered Seeta. How is she now ? What is the state of 
her mind and body? And dear son of Anjanaa, tell us about Raa- 
vana’s state and behaviour. After knowing everything we shall be 
in a position to consider and decide what needs to be done next.” 

Hanumaan tendered mental salutations to Seeta and began his 
story. 

“You know how I sprang into the sky from this peak. As I was 
flying over the sea, a golden mountain rose suddenly above the surface 
of the water. I thought it was something rising uo to obstruct me 
and I gave it a flick with my tail. Meekly receiving the blow, the 
mountain said in a sweet voice: ‘My son, I am no enemy. I was 
saved by your father from the dire wrath of Indra and am ever grateful 
to him. I now live in safety sheltered by the sea. In olden days, we 
mountains had wings and flew hither and thither in the sky and the 
world was in dread of us. Then Indra, to rid the world of this terror, 
relentlessly pursued us and cut off our wings. It was from this com¬ 
mon fate that your father rescued me. You are engaged in the most 
fatiguing task of flying across the sea. I have come up here to offer 
you some rest. Stay here for a while and then fulfil Raama’s purpose.* 
1 declined the offer for lack of time and, taking leave of him, went on 
my way, 1 * 



238 


RAAMAAYANA 


Thus, in proper sequence and without omission, Hanumaan re¬ 
counted all that happened during the passage and in the city of Lanka; 
tiow he searched for Seeta in vain in Raavana’s palace, how he found 
her at last in the Asoka Vana , how there Raavana sought and impor¬ 
tuned her and was spurned by her, what dire threats he held out, how 
the Raakshasis teased her and drove her to think of putting an end to 
her own life, and how it was at this juncture he approached and gave 
her news of Raama and hope and interest in life. 

With tears in his eyes he told them what a divinely precious soul 
Seeta was and how nobly she had borne herself. Then he narrated 
how he destroyed the park and killed the Raakshasa warriors, how 
he was finally bound by Indrajit and produced before Raavana. He 
described what took place at the interview, and how as a punishment 
for his boldness of speech they set fire to his tail, furnishing him 
.thereby with a great torch with which he set their city ablaze. 

On such occasions, when a character has to recapitulate past 
events, we can see Vaalmeeki’s skill in retelling the story in beautiful 
words. This is a source of special pleasure to those who read the 
Raamaayana as a religious exercise. They do not dislike such re¬ 
petitions. Indeed it is one of the special charms in a large epic. Bui 
I have abridged the recital to suit the general reader who has- mo time 
•or taste for an oft-repeated tale however edifying. 

Those who wish to avert some calamity or desire success, in some 
igreat undertaking usually make a Paaraayana (devotional reading 
-exercise) of the whole of the Sundarakaanda , the canto dealing with 
Hanumaan’s expedition to Lanka. It is believed that the same result 
can be obtained even by a Paaraayana of only this chapter where Hanu¬ 
maan relates to the Vaanara warriors all that happened between his 
crossing and recrossing the sea. 

After this full narration of the happenings, Hanumaan proceeded: 
“Our efforts have been successful so far because of the power of chastity 
of Seeta who is chastity incarnate. When I think of her 1 wonder how 
the Raakshasa could seize and carry her away and yet escape being 
burnt to ashes. But Raavana too had accumulated great power 
through his tapas. Even so, Seeta could have reduced him to ashes 
if she had chosen, but she patiently endured all this, because she wanted 
the punishement to proceed from her lord. And now what is your 
advice? Shall we go straight to Lanka, destroy Raavana and the 
Raakshasa hordes, recover Seeta and restore her to Raama? It is not 
as if we have not the strength to do this. Single-handed I can destroy 
Ahem and leave not a trace behind. And Jaambavaan too, all by 
toimself, can utterly destroy the Raakshasas . And so can our Prince 
Angada; and so can Panasa or Neela; so can Mainda and Dwivida, 



A CARNIVAL 


239 


the sons of Asvini. Yes, there are many among us who can slay Raa- 
yana and the Raakshasa hordes. Indeed I proclaimed aloud in Lanka: 
'1, the messenger of Raama and the minister of Sugreeva, am come to 
destroy you.’ But while we are talking, Vaidehi, the Goddess of purity, 
is there under the Simsupa tree a closely guarded prisoner pining with 
aching heart for rescue. In her hour of despair, 1 showed myself to 
her, and comforted her with the assurance of her lord’s speedy arrival. 
Consider well and decide what should now be done.” 

Angada, listening to all this, full of indignation jumped up, saying: 

“I can do it all alone. And there are so many of us here, eager 
warriors thirsting for battle. It would be improper, after all these 
days, to go to Raama empty-handed and without Seeta. Let us go 
straight to Lanka, destroy Raavana and the Raakshasa army and 
return to Kishkindha with -Seeta in our midst.” 

Jaambavaan, old and wise, uttered a gentle protest. “No, it is 
not right, dear prince,” he said. “We should report everything to 
Raama and Lakshmana and then do what they desire. Raama’s 
purpose should be fulfilled in the manner that he desires. That alone 
is proper.” 

All the Vaanaras , including Hanumaan and Angada, agreed that 
this was the right thing to do. They then rose into the sky and flew 
towards Kishkindha. 

They alighted near the protected park of the Vaanara king. They 
made their way into it, drank honey and ate fruit, regardless of the 
warnings of the guards. They indulged in unrestrained revelry and 
ruined the beautiful park. 

Unable to stand the riotous behaviour of the mirth-makers, 
Dadhimukha, Sugreeva’s uncle and keeper of the royal park, hurried 
to the king and complained. 

“Your protected park has been laid waste. The Vaanaras that 
went south have returned and, alighting in the garden, are behaving 
outrageously. They pay no heed to my words. On the contrary, 
they assaulted and insulted me, drank up and ruined all the honey¬ 
combs and plucked and ate fruit as they liked and are now lying sense¬ 
less as a result of their revelry. The trees and plants are all in ruinL 
The king should forthwith inflict condign punishment on these un¬ 
disciplined Vaanaras .” 

Sugreeva understood the position at once. " Lakshmana, 
it Is clear that Hanumaan, Jaambavaan and Angada have 
succeeded in their search and are celebrating their triumph in this 
manner.” 

Saying this, he turned to Dadhimukha and said to him: “Send 
them all here at once.” 



240 


RAAMAAYANA 


Dadhimukha now understood the real state of affairs and 
hastening to the Vaanaras , conveyed to them the king’s command. 


CHAPTER LIX 

THE TIDINGS CONVEYED 

Suoreeva’s conjecture was like nectar to Raama’s ears. They 
eagerly awaited the arrival of the Vaanaras . In a short while a great 
clamour was in the air and the Vaanara horde alighted with cries of 
triumph. 

Hanumaan and Angada leading, the Vaanaras marched to the 
presence of their king who with Raama and Lakshmana were awaiting 
their coming. 

Hanumaan bowed and said: “Seen have I the Goddess of 
purity, your queen. She is safe and well in Lanka. I salute her 
from here across space.” And he turned southwards and offered 
worshipful salutation. 

Thus succinctly did Hanumaan convey to the Prince the glad 
news that Seeta was found and was well in body and mind. Sugreeva 
and Lakshmana, beside themselves with joy, embraced Raama. 

“Dear Vaanara friends!” exclaimed the Prince of Ayodhya, 
“tell me where exactly Seeta is. How is she ? How did you manage 
to see her ? Tell me everything in detail.” His eager enquiries 
came quick upon one another. 

The other Vaanaras turned to Hanumaan who stood behind, 
and asked him to narrate all that he had seen and done. Hanumaan 
began to tell the tale. With his unrivalled courage and strength 
and singlehanded, he had performed a mighty task; and yet he did 
not push himself forward into the presence of Prince Raama or King 
Sugreeva, but gave precedence to Angada and the aged Jaambavaan 
and the others, and was silent until they asked him to speak* 

Indeed, generally, great men who dare and do mighty deeds 
•are disinclined to speak about their exploits. In painting this scene 
the poet brings out this law of natural conduct 

Another thing to note here is Hanumaan’s reverence for Seeta. 
From the time he first saw her his reverence for her appeared to 
surpass even his devotion to Raama, if the two could be distinguished. 
This is the case with all pious devotees who regard and worship the 
Supreme as Mother. When that aspect of the All-immanent Power 
is before true devotees, their reverence becomes ecstatic like the child’s 
joy in the mother’s lap. 



THE TIDINGS CONVEYED 


241 


"Crossing the hundred yojanaas of water, I reached the city of 
the wicked Raavana on the southern shore. There, in a park attached 
to the palace, I saw Seeta held prisoner and closely guarded. It 
was wonderful to see her emaciated form. She maintained life only 
in the thought of her lord and repetition of his name. Cruel and 
ugly Raakshasis surrounded her. I saw her lying on the ground, her 
hair unkempt and her face clouded by sorrow and care. When I 
reached there, she had resolved to put an end to her life to escape 
from the Raakshasa king's importunities and threats. I began uttering 
praises of your glory in a low voice. Unknown to her, and a mere 
monkey, I had to secure her confidence first. Then I spoke to her. 
I told her of the alliance between King Sugreeva and yourself. I 
told her of your great grief and unchanging love. This filled her 
with sweet sorrow and awakened hope in her and the desire to live. 
Asked for a token which 1 might convey to you, the angel of purity 
gave me this jewel to be given to you. 

"She also told me how once a crow had troubled her while you 
were asleep and how you were grieved about it; she asked me to remind 
you of the incident. She wanted me to remind you of anbther occasion 
when, roaming among the hills perspiration had made the tilak trickle 
down her forehead and you replaced it with red ochre rubbed out of a 
rock. 

"She bade me tell you that she would struggle and keep alive 
for a month, but then she would perish at the hands of Raavana, 
or she would seek her own release of death. She bade me convey 
her respects to the Vaanara King. Now let us think and make pre¬ 
parations at once for proceeding to Lanka to redeem the princess." 

Saying this, he handed the sikhaa-mani , crest-jewel of Seeta to 
the Prince. 

Raama took the jewel from Hanumaan *s hand and at the sight 
of it fainted, racked beyond bearing, between extremes of joy and 
grief. 

He pressed the jewel to his bosom and cried, "O Lakshmana!" 
Again he embraced Hanumaan and said: "Heroic son of Vaayu 
blessed are you who have seen Seeta! 1 too see her now before me. 
You have, indeed, brought her to me." 

"Dear hero, my heart’s friend!" he cried, "tell me everything again 
in full. Tell me once again what Seeta said. Let me hear her words 
which are sweet like water to parched Ups." 

Hanumaan narrated the whole story to the eager Usteners and 
Raama wept when Hanumaan repeated these words of Seeta: 

"Many Raakshasa* has my Raama slain, but why has he not come 
her* yet to slay Raavana and save me from my sufferings? Why 



242 


RAAMAAYANA 


has he not sent brave Lakshmana to slay the wretch? It cannot be 
that my lord has grown indifferent towards me! For I know of no 
wrong I have ever committed in thought or word or deed to lose his 
lore.” 

Hanumaan said: “1 tried to console her saying, ‘Raama is ever 
thinking of you and grieving for you. He knows no rest. Do not 
imagine that Raama and Lakshmana have forgotten you. No words 
of mine could describe their grief. Now that I am going to tell them 
you are here, it will not be long before they come and destroy Raavana 
and return with you in triumph to Ayodhya.’ It was then she untied 
the jewel from a knot in a corner of her sari and gave it to me. I 
placed it on my head in reverence and, securing it, started to return. 
She stopped me and uttered a benediction again and said: ‘Friend 
Hanumaan! Convey the news of my welfare to the lions, my lord 
and his brother, to King Sugreeva and his ministers. Devise your 
plans and help him to come here and redeem me. 1 trust in you, 
Hanumaan, absolutely. May God bless you!” 

“Lay aside your grief, my Lord,” continued Hanumaan, and 
think out now what has to be done. Seeta doubted how you and 
the Vaanara army could cross the sea. I assured her that she need 
have no fear or doubt on that score, since, by no means the strongest 
among the Vaanaras , I myself had crossed it as she could see. I 
said to her that 1 myself could carry Raama and Lakshmana on my 
shoulders and cross the sea and bring them there.” 


CHAPTER LX 

THE ARMY MOVES FORWARD 

Raama heard Hanumaan with heart and eyes overflowing and 
when he had come to the end of his narrative, said: 

“The deed done by Hanumaan none else in the world could 
even conceive of attempting—crossing the sea, entering Lanka pro¬ 
tected by Raavana and his formidable hosts and accomplishing the 
task set him by his king not only fully but beyond the fondest hopes 
of all” 

And it saddened him to think that it was not in his power to 
reward Hanumaan at all adequately for the supreme joy he had 
brought. “O Hanumaan, let this embrace of mine stand as an 
acknowledgement of all that my heart feels of gratitude for your 
great service to me.” 

So saying while his whole being thrilled with grateful love, he 



THE ARMY MOVES FORWARD 


243 


took Hanumaan into his arms and clasped him to his breast. 

“Sugreeva,” he said, “Hanumaan has indeed wrought a wonder. 
He entered Lanka so strongly guarded by the Raakshasas . He 
has discovered Seeta and, by consoling her, preserved her life. Bring¬ 
ing back good news of her, he has saved my life also. 

“But how are we now going to cross the sea? How can our 
huge army reach the other shore? Before we can attack Raavana’s 
city and the Raakshasa's army, we have first to cross the sea. I 
see no way of doing it. Our joy in Hanumaan’s achievement and 
the good news he has brought is overlaid by anxiety about our future 
course.’* 

But the Vaanara king said: “What is this, my Lord Raama? 
What need is there for dejection? Here are my warriors, ready 
to lay down their lives for you and let it be our joy to transport you 
and Lakshmana to Lanka. Have no doubt that we can do it. The 
moment Hanumaan saw Lanka, you may take it the fortress has fallen. 
Doubt only makes the warrior weak and afraid and should be cast 
aside. Our victory is certain. The feeling of confidence in my 
heart at this moment is a good enough omen for me.” 

Thus Sugreeva reassured Raama, and inspired him to action. 
Then Raama and Hanumaan discussed matters about Lanka, the 
town, the fort, the moat and other defences. Understating nothing, 
Hanumaan described the wealth of Lanka, the happy lives of the 
Raakshasas , their confidence in Raavana and their affection for him. 
He told Raama of the might and size of Raavana’s army; the strength 
and structure of the fortress; the alertness of the sentry; the moats, 
walls and gates, catapults and drawbridges, the care and thoroughness 
of all the arranagements for defence. He also explained how the 
coast too was carefully guarded so that no enemy ship could approach 

“And yet you may be certain,” he said, “our Vaanara army is 
fully equal to the conquest of Lanka. We have with us peerless 
warriors like Angada, Dwivida, Mainda, Jaambavaan, Panama, Nala 
and Neela. We have an enormous army. We shall fly in the sky 
and without touching the ground destroy Lanka. Its mountains 
and forest defences are nothing to us. We shall raze the city to 
the ground. Fix the auspicious time and give us the order to start.” 

Under the star of triumph, Uttara Pnalguni, at high noon, the 
army set forward towards the southern sea. Good omens greeted 
them. 

As they marched, Raama, Sugreeva and Lakshmana went con¬ 
versing with one another. “If only Seeta could know that we have 
set out,” said Raama, “it would encourage her to keep life going.” 



244 


raamaayana 


Scouts who knew the way went ahead* looking out for enemies 
lying in ambush. They led the army through regions that could 
provide food and drink for the huge army. With speed the army 
crossed mountains and forests. 

The Vaanaras sometimes carried Raama and Lakshmana on 
their shoulders so that the march might be speedy. Every moment 
the enthusiasm of the Vaanaras increased. They jumped and roared 
and sported. Raama could hear them saying to one another, “1 
shall kill Raavana! I shall meet and kill Raavana!” 

Neela and Kumuda went ahead reconnoitring in front of the 
army. Strong warriors were kept in the rear, guarding it from behind. 
King Sugreeva, Raama and Lakshmana were in the middle. Raama 
gave strict orders that the army should inflict no harm or hardship 
on the towns and villages on the way. The noise of the marching 
army was like the roar of the sea and filled the eight quarters. The 
dust they raised covered the sky. 

When they came to the Mahendra mountain, Raama climbed 
the peak and surveyed the sea. 

“We should now think and decide,” he said, “how the army 
can cross the sea. Till then let it camp and rest in the forest.” And 
Sugreeva passed the order to the commanders. The Vaanaras 
camped in the forest by the sea shore. 

When Sugreeva, Raama and Lakshmana had satisfied them¬ 
selves that the whole army had settled in comfort, the two brothers 
retired apart. 

Raama said: “If a person loses a dear thing, people say that 
time will enable him to forget about it and he will cease to grieve. 
But Lakshmana, this is not what I find.” 

Dejection again seized Raama for the thought of Seeta and 
her condition preyed on his mind now more than even 
before. 

“When Raavana seized Seeta and carried her off,” Raama said, 
breaking down with fresh grief, “she must have cried aloud ‘Ha my 
Lord! Ha Raama ! Ha Lakshmana!’ But she saw no one coming. 
We failed to go to her help. Every time I think of the suffering 
she then must have gone through, my grief wells up afresh. What 
am I to do? Like the limbs of one who has drunk poison, my whole 
body bums with pain. She is held in the grip of the cruel Raakshasis, 
and she is in great anguish. Janaka’s daughter, the bride who entered 
the home of great Dasaratha, she lies on the bare ground, a prisoner 
surrounded by RaakshaSisl” 

“Raama!” said Lakshmana, “cease from sorrow. Soon we 
shall destroy Raavana and rescue Seeta and take bar home toAyodhya, 



ANXIETY IN LANKA 


245 


She will enter the city like the goddess of chastity. Give up your 
grief. Arm yourself with courage.” 


. CHAPTER LX1 

ANXIETY IN LANKA 

Now let us leave Raama and his host here and go back to Raavana. 
Great poets in all languages delineate with sympathy even their bad 
characters allowing gleams of goodness to shine through occasionally, 
for nature has not made anybody wholly and unredeemably evil. 

The poet’s aim is to direct the reader’s mind into the path of 
Good, the saatvik way. For this purpose they use all their skill and 
power in developing even their raajasik and taamasik characters* 

The reader Who is held by raajasik and taamasik qualities, naturally 
tends to sympathise with such characters; much more so readers 
below the average who are untouched by the saatvik element. They 
would regard the deeds of the hero and other saatvik characters as 
mere fiction invented for blind worship, and identify themselves with 
the raajasik and taamasik characters and even claim these as their 
own kith and kin. They would find themselves attracted by such 
characters and follow their doings with considerable interest. 

“Paradise Lost,” the English epic on a Biblical theme, is famous 
throughout the world. In this poem Milton delineates the Almighty 
and Jesus, His spiritual son and human incarnation, as well as several 
orders of angels. But the most impressive character in the great 
epic is Satan who rebelled against God and brought sin and death 
into this world. Critics of English poetry admire Milton’s wonderful 
success in the characterisation of Satan. Similarly, the great dramatic 
poet Shakespeare has created a wonderful character in Shylock, the 
usurer and miser. Even such embodiments of despicable qualities 
are presented by the poets as possessing courage, determination, 
energy and other good qualities which attract us and serve as a bright 
background to their blackness. In Vaalmeekfs portraits of Raavana 
and Kumbhakarna too, we notice the same artistic skill. The cook 
who meets all tastes shows his skill in making out of bitter vegetables 
an attractive dish. So does the poet show his skill in portraying evil. 

The Roakshasa king was somewhat ashamed and afraid at the 
thought of what Hanumaan had achieved in Lanka. He summoned 
his ministers and took counsel with them. 

He began in an apologetic tone. “What has happened is some¬ 
thing strange and unexpected. No one has till now been known to 



246 


RAAMAAYANA 


enter our city, but this envoy of Raama has not only entered Lanka, 
he has met and talked with the imprisoned Seeta. He has destroyed 
temples and palaces. He has slain some of our best warriors. He 
has filled our people with fear. And this thing is not likely to stop 
here. Hence we have to consider what should be done. You know 
that the king should decide his course of action only after consulting 
his loyal ministers of clear vision and well-versed in statecraft. And 
so I have summoned this Council. Raama has become an inveterate 
•enemy. Let us consider what we should do about it. 

“The king has no use for ministers who are not straight-forward 
•or who not knowing their own minds wobble in their advice. The 
matter before us is most important. Raama is strong, and so is his 
army. It is certain that they will contrive somehow to cross the sea. 
It would be unwise to trust to that single defence. Consider well and 
tell me how we can strengthen and secure our city and army and what 
steps we should take to defend ourselves.” • 

After listening to the king, the members of the Assembly spoke 
with one voice. 

“Great king ! Knowing well that our army and our weapons 
are the strongest in the world, why need you be anxious ? Where 
is the enemy who dares to attack your fortress and who can oppose 
your army with any hope of success ? The world knows your might. 
Did you not invade the city of Bhogavati and defeat the Naaga king ? 
Did you not attack powerful Kubera and defeat him and his Yakshas 
and capture his Pushpaka Vimaana as well as this island of Lanka ? 
Did not Maya in fear of you sue for your favour and friendship 
and give you his daughter in marriage ? How many cities in the 
nether region have you not attacked and taken ? You fought and 
defeated the Kaalakeyas. The sons of Varuna, yes, and Yama 
himself have been suppliants for your mercy. And who is this Raama ? 
Your son Indrajit by himself can destroy Raama and his Vaanara 
army. Did he not seize and imprison Indra himself and afterwards 
let him go ? How can Raama and his Vaanaras stand against such 
a warrior ? You have only to bid Indrajit destroy this Vaanara crowd 
and all will be over. Why should you, great king, be anxious ?” 

Thus they spoke in praise of their king. 

The Commander-in-chief Prahasta rose like a great black cloud. 
“You, who subdued in battle the Devas, Daanavas and Gandharvas, 
why should you, oh King of kings, feel anxious because of these 
little creatures ? It is true that the monkey came here and caught us 
napping and did some mischief. But this sort of thing will never 
happen again, If he comes again, I know how to manage him. I 
alone can destroy the whole Vaanara race, if only you will order it. 



ANXIETY IN LANKA 


247 


You need not fear any danger from this small indiscretion of yours, 
the abduction of Seeta.” 

Next Durmukha rose and roared : “We shall not let this 
monkey’s bravado and undeserved good luck go unavenged. 1 shall 
go this very instant and destroy the Vaanara army, root and branch,, 
and return.” 

Vajradamshtra stood with a terrible iron club in his hand and 
cried: “Here is my weapon unwashed and still covered with the 
blood and flesh of my foes. Why waste your time talking about this 
monkey? Are not Raama and Lakshmana our enemies ? 1 shad 
slay them first and then destroy the Vaanara army and return imme¬ 
diately. Only let me go. I have a piece of advice to give you, King* 
if you would listen. Let us order some Raakshasa warriors to put 
on human form and approach Raama, telling him, ‘Bharata has sent 
us in advance. A great army is coming behind to help you.’ While 
Raama is thus fooled into negligence, our Raakshasa army can travel 
through the sky and destroy him and his followers on the other shore. 
This is my advice.” 

Nikumbha, son of Kumbhakarna, rose and said : “All of you 
may stay here with the King. I shall go alone and meet and destroy 
the enemy and bring you the news.” 

Another Raakshasa , licking his lips, said with gusto : “I shall 
go alone and kill and feast on the flesh of these two men, Raama 
and Lakshmana. Please let me go.” 

Thus one after another they got up and spoke brave words to 
please Raavana and then all of them stood up together and, raising 
their weapons, roared aloud. 

At that Vibheeshana, the younger brother of Raavana, made 
them all sit down, and said to the king with folded hands: “Brother* 
what these people say is sweet to hear but not true or good to act upom 
Anything done in violation of Neeti Shaastra (the Science of Politics> 
can only lead to grief and ruin. It is only after trying j mama (concilia¬ 
tion), daana (buying off the enemy) and bheda (sowing discord) that 
one should think of using danda (force of arms) against a foe. I 
you take the advice of these people and start a war now, it would 
mean the destruction of Lanka and all of us. We should also consider 
the demands of dharma . It was not right, it was indeed a great sin 
for you to have seized and brought Raama’s wife here. We should 
first cleanse ourselves of this sin. What harm did Raama do to us ? 
What Raama did in the Dandaka forest was in pure self-defence 
and the defence of those that looked to him for protection. He 
fought with and slew only those that went out to slay him. His 
actions surely do not justify your carrying away his wife. And 



248 


RAAMAAYANA 


even if we had any just complaint against him, we should have met 
him in battle. Instead of that, to contrive his absence and seize 
his wife was very wrong and sinful. When the fault is on our side, 
it is morally not right that we should think of battle. Further, war- 
craft requires that before fighting we should take some measure 
of Raama’s strength and that of his army. We have had some taste 
of Hanumaan’s strength and skill. It is pointless to talk lightly 
of him. Did he not do remarkable things ? Though our own 
strength may be great, we should weigh it against the enemy’s strength 
and then decide whether we should seek war or avoid it. But first, 
it is essential that we should restore Seeta. My advice is this, before 
Raama and the Vaanaras attack Lanka, let us restore Seeta, Dear 
brother, I am saying all this for your good. Pray, do not be angry 
with me. We should first set right our own fault and. then think of 
other things.” 

Thus with folded hands Vibheeshana besought Raavana. 

Though Raavana was pleased with the vain-glorious words of 
his ministers and generals, there was doubt lurking in his mind. 
Hence, after listening to Vibheeshana, he said: “Let us meet again 
tomorrow and consider this matter.” 

He adjourned the Council and retired. 


CHAPTER LXII 

RAAVANA CALLS A COUNCIL AGAIN 

As soon as the day dawned, Vibheeshana went to the king. He 
had thought deeply over the matter and had come to a decision. His 
brother’s welfare demanded that he should seek somehow to convert 
and save him. 

Vibheeshana entered the royal palace and stood with folded 
hands before the king. Raavana sent away ail but the principal 
Ministers and asked his brother to speak. 

“My brother and my Lord,’’ began Vibheeshana, “forgive me 
if what 1 say is not pleasing to your ears. My desire is not to flatter 
but to save you from a great danger while there is yet time, I beg 
of you to listen to me, consider well what I say and then decide on 
your course of action. 

“Ever since you brought Seeta to Lanka, we see only evi} omens. 
Even when the libation is poured with the correct mantra, the flame 
does not spring to receive it. One finds snakes in places of worship. 
Ants infest food offerings. The udders of cows are dry and 



raavana calls a council again 


249 


no milk. Elephants, horses, camels and donkeys fall sick, reject 
food and behave strangely. Medicines have lost their efficacy. 
Crows perch in numbers on the house-tops making hideous noises. 
Vultures circling overhead'fill the augurs with anxiety. Foxes boldly 
enter the city and howl at unusual hours. Wild beasts haunt the 
streets. These portents should not be disregarded. I beg of you, 
restore Seeta to her husband. It is only since her coming here that 
these omens are noticed as you can verify by asking others. 
Why should we, who have so much to lose, needlessly, incur 
any one’s enmity? Let us restore Seeta to her people and live 
happily.” 

Thus did Vibheeshana plead earnestly with his brother. 

"Never, never!” exclaimed Raavana. "Let there be no talk 
here of Seeta being returned to her people. I do not think much 
of this enemy. I see nothing to be afraid of. Now, you may 

H 

g°‘ 

Though he spoke thus and was obstinate, Raavana had no 
peace of mind. Seeta had not yielded to him and his own near kinsmen 
disapproved of his conduct. He was agitated, but putting on an 
air of confidence and unconcern he summoned the Council again. 
Lust and injured vanity kept him from the straight path, but he found 
some consolation in taking counsel from others. 

From the palace to the Hall of Council he drove through the 
street in a golden chariot drawn by noble steeds. Warriors, holding 
swords and shields and wearing brilliant uniforms, marched in front, 
behind and on both sides. Others mounted on elephants and horses 
and armed with axes, spears and other terrible weapons, followed 
the chariot. Trumpets were blown and drums beaten. 

As the Lord of Lanka, accompanied by his retinue, passed 
majestically through the royal street, his people bent low their heads 
and folded their hands and invoked victory for him. As he entered 
the hall, drums and trumpets sounded loudly and filled the eight 
quarters. 

Raavana took his seat on an agate throne in the great hall cons* 
tructed by Maya which shone in all the splendour of gold and silver 
and precious carpets. 

Hundreds of demons stood sentry without. Obedient to the 
call of the King, thousands of Raakshasa warriors had assembled 
in the chamber. Long rows of vehicles stood in the streets. Within 
the chamber each was assigned a seat appropriate to his rank. 

Priests and chanters of the Vedas came in hundreds and after 
receiving tokens of respect from the king were seated in the 
hall. 



250 


R AAMAAY ANA 


Vibheeshana, Suka, Prahasta and others bowed before the 
king and sat in their respective places. Devoted officers thronged 
the hall, all brave and efficient and waiting to fulfil the commands 
of their king. 

The air was heavy with rich perfume. The assembly equalled 
Indra’s in splendour and everyone felt that momentous decisions 
were to be taken. Raavana broke the hushed expectant silence of 
the great assembly in a voice deep and resonant as thunder. He 
said : 

“You are strong, brave and skilled in the arts of peace and war. 
You can find a way out of every difficulty. Never so far has your 
advice miscarried. And so, once again, I seek your counsel. You 
know well what I have done. I have brought here Seeta who was 
living in the Dandaka forest. My desire for her so entirely possesses 
me that sending her back is to me unthinkable. She has not so far 
submitted to my wishes and entertains a foolish hope that Raama 
will come here and redeem her. I have told her that it is an im¬ 
possible wish and a vain hope. Finally, she asked for a year’s time 
and I gave it to her. I now seek your counsel. My desire is un- 
fafilled. I can never agree to sending Seeta back and begging forgive¬ 
ness from Raama. Till now neither you, my great warriors, nor I 
have known defeat in battle. True, a big monkey somehow contrived 
to cross the sea and wrought some mischief here. But hard indeed 
will it be for Raama and the Vaanara army to cross the sea and come 
here. And even if they did come, what need we fear? What chance 
have they against us? 

“On the other side of the sea, Raama, Lakshmana, Sugreeva 
and the Vaanaras are encamped. Think how we can slay Raama 
and Lakshmana. 

“I should have summoned the Council earlier. But Kumbha- 
karna was in his period of sleep and I waited till he woke 
up.” 

Thus spoke Raavana, blinded by lust, hiding his real anxiety 
and mixing a little falsehood with truth. For Seeta had not asked 
for a year’s time. She had absolutely rejected his advances, but he 
asked her to reconsider and gave her a year’s time. 



CHAPTER LXIU 


V1BHEESHANA 

Kumbhakarna, the younger brother of Raavana, spoke in the* 
assembly : 

“Great King! Ignoring the principles of state-craft, you have run 
into a great danger. If you had any grievance against Raama and 
Lakshmana, you should have met them face to face and defeated 
and slain them before carrying off Seeta. If you had acted thus, 
even Seeta would have admired you and there would then have been* 
a possibility of her accepting you. As waters flow down a mountain* 
she would have followed a victorious warrior. 

“You did not consult us before committing the offence and in¬ 
curred the enmity of Raama, but now, when it is too late, you seek 
our counsel. This is not the right way of doing things that a king 
should follow.** 

Having spoken thus harshly, Kumbhakarna looked at the king 
and saw he was pained. Affectionate as he was brave, he could not 
endure the sadness in his brother’s face. 

“Let by-gones be by-gones,” he thought, “one cannot forsake 
one’s brother.’’ Kumbhakarna was under no delusion as to the con¬ 
sequences, but his generous spirit accepted them for the sake of the 
brother he idolised. He knew that kaama was a peerless warrior,. 
He knew the power of his bow and also the limitations of the boons 
that Raavana had received from the gods. But it was no good taking 
the heart out of others in the face of unavoidable peril and so he also 
began to speak vaunting words like the rest: 

“What you did may be wrong, and so too the way you chose to- 
do it. You have done first what you should have done last. Amd 
yet, it does not matter. I shall slay Raama. Do not be afraid. One- 
or two of his arrows may touch me. In spite of it, I shall kill him 
and drink his blood and the victory will be yours. My brother, lay 
aside your care, and think of other things.” 

Some people suggest that Kumbhakarna was duM and so he thus, 
contradicted himself; but it was not stupidity, it was due to generous, 
affection that he accepted the inevitable fearlessly. He was a proud, 
warrior who loved his brother and his people and he decided on 
honourable death with them. 

Prahasta was Raavana’s chief counsellor. He spoke of the King’s, 
invincible strength and cheered him up. 

Raavana now grew enthusiastic and said: “Didn’t 1 vanquish 



252 


RAAMAAYANA 


Kubera? Didn’t I drive him out and make Lanka my own? Who 
dare come here and oppose me? Let us see!” 

The assembly applauded these words. 

Vibheeshana alone did not join in the applause. He did not 
mind the wrath of his royal brother. He felt it was his duty to warn 
him of the danger and the error of his ways. 

He felt bound to make his utmost effort to save him and the Raa- 
kshasa race from doom. He stood up and spoke: 

•‘You have brought Seeta and with her, death for yourself and 
your race. Your first duty to yourself and your people is to restore 
tier to Raama. If you fail in this, we shall all assuredly perish. This 
is certain.” 

He went on describing Raama’s strength and skill and his mastery 
of weapons. He spoke frankly and without fear. 

“If we oppose Raama,” he said, “defeat is inevitable. Our 
fortune is sinking. Let us restore Seeta, seek Raama’s pardon and 
thus save our kingdom, our lives and possessions and honour.” 

At this importunity of Vibheeshana, Indrajit, Raavana’s son, 
lost patience and burst out: 

“My uncle’s words fill me with shame. What race are we? What 
is our strength? I marvel that a descendant of Pulastya should talk 
in this strain and that the assembly should meekly sit and listen. My 
uncle has only betrayed his evil intentions. We can never agree to 
his proposal. Are we to be afraid of two petty humans? Did I not 
beat Indra down in battle and his hordes of gods? Does not the 
whole world tremble even now in terror before us? Vibheeshana’s 
counsel is an insult to our race!” 

Vibheeshana answered gently: “Boy, you lack experience. That 
is why you talk thus. You are the king’s son and should be his best 
friend; but I am afraid you are proving yourself his worst enemy. 
And you, ministers who ought to give good advice, you are leading the 
king to ruin. My Lord of Lanka! Do not reject what I say. Re¬ 
turn Seeta honourably to Raama and seek his forgiveness. This is 
the only way; there is no other. Failing to pursue the only available 
course, we shall all perish.” 

Raavana’s rage was now uncontrollable. *T put up with ydiir 
talk thus far,” he shouted in anger, “because you are my brother. Etoe 
you would by now be dead. A brother, I see, is one’s worst enemy. 
All the world knows that the envy of brothers brings dishonour and 
discomfiture to the brave. They hide their real desire and wait f6r 
their time and, when it comes, do not hesitate to practise their treachery. 
How true is the complaint of the wild elephants in the story! •We 
axe not afraid of the burning fire. We do not mind the hunters and 



THE VAANARVS DOUBT 


253 


their long spears. The noosed ropes and the chains can do little harm 
to us. But the elephants which pin the hunters and give us trouble, 
these brothers and cousins who turn against us, they are our terror!' 
Yes. So long as one is safe and prosperous, the brother smiles and 
talks pleasantly. But when danger comes, he is ready to leave. The 
bee does not stay with the flower after the honey has been sucked. It 
goes in search of another flower. Brothers and cousins are no better 
than these bees. One cannot trust them in adversity. If any one else 
should have spoken as you have done, Vibheeshana, I would have slain 
him here and now. Base fellow! You are a disgrace to our race!” 

Unable to bear the insult, Vibheeshana rose and said: “My 
brother, you may speak as you please. Though you have wandered 
from the way of dharma , you are still my brother and I warn you that 
drawn by the noose of Yama, you are going along the path of des¬ 
truction. My advice, salutary but unpleasant, you reject. It is easy 
to speak sweet words; your ministers are doing it. I spoke for your 
good, but truth is bitter and you hate it, 

“The terrible vision of Raama’s darts destroying you is before 
my mind’s eye and makes me speak as I do. You call me your enemy. 
Defend your city and your life as well as you can. God bless you! I 
am going. May you be happy! I thought I could serve you in your 
need, but you will not let me. You imagine that I envy you and your 
possessions. Good counsel is rejected by one whose end is near.” 

Having spokdh thus, and realising that there was no place for 
him in Lanka thereafter, Vibheeshana renounced all his possessions 
and, rising into the sky, proceeded straight to the spot where Raama 
and Lakshmana were encamped. Four good Raakshasa friends went 
along with him. 


CHAPTER LXIV 

THE VAANARAS* DOUBT 

Having committed a sin and run into danger, Raavana did not see 
how to extricate himself. Like other kings in a quandary, he called 
a council for consultation. Many spoke flattering words. Only two 
spoke harshly. 

One said: “You have committed a fault. But I will give up 
my life for you.” This was Kumbhakama. 

The other, Vibheeshana, said: “You have committed a sin, but 
there is still time for repentanoe and escape from consequences. If 
you take this right and wise course, we shall all escape destruction 



254 


RAAMAAYANA 


and live happily. Restore Seeta and seek pardon of Raama.” 

“Never,” said Raavana. 

“Then our ways part and I leave you,” said Vibheeshana. 

In a conflict of duties, each one follows his own nature. All 
cannot follow one and the same path. 

Raavana’s self-indulgent vanity would not let him admit his error 
or retrace his steps. Very rarely does one who has committed a sin 
confess defeat. It requires some courage of a bad sort to commit a 
sin; but it requires much greater courage of a noble kind to confess it. 

It was this nobler courage that Raavana lacked. When an evil 
is being perpetrated, the friends of the evil-doer face a difficult problem. 
Some are constrained against their better judgment to espouse the 
wrong cause through gratitude for past kindness, a sense of loyalty, 
or affinities of blood. Others think it their duty to try and reform 
the sinner, regardless of his anger and hatred and consequent danger 
to themselves and if their efforts fail, they part company from the sinner, 
rather than abandon dharma and give their support to the sinner who 
persists in his crime. They hold that it can never be one’s duty to 
support or co-operate with adharma. It would indeed be adharma to* 
refrain from doing one’s best to reform the sinner or to co-operate in 
his sin. 

In.the Raamaayana , Kumbhakarna and Vibheeshana represent 
these two different types. If Raavana had told Vibheeshana: “Come, 
let us go to the Dankaka forest and carry off Seeta,” it is inconceivable 
that Vibheeshana could have complied. That is why we respect 
Vibheeshana. 

“At least now restore Seeta and be happy,” Vibheeshana said 
and tried to persuade Raavana. “Raama will surely forgive you. 
Take the way of dharma .” But Raavana would not listen, and Vibhee¬ 
shana, as an enemy of sin, had no alternative but to part company 
from the perverse wickedness of Raavana. Hence it would be wrong, 
to find fault with Vibheeshana. And if we find fault with him, it is. 
because our concern for dharma is weak. 

But can we find fault with Kumbhakarna? We cannot do this 
either. He is one of those noble soldiers of lost causes whose faults 
we forgive for their selfless loyalty, and sublime acceptance of death. 

But, because we cannot condemn Kumbhakarna, it does not 
follow that we must condemn Vibheeshana. There are some people 
today who rejoice in arguing against dharma and against Vibheeshana; 
hence this elaboration of a simple point. 

Men are restrained from evil by the wholesome fear that if they 
commit sin they would forfeit the affection and goodwill of their 
friends and kinsmen. This fear is a strong incentive to good behaviour 



THE VAANARA’S DOUBT 


255 


and its removal would be a serious loss in society. Ail this is for¬ 
gotten by those who argue that Vibheeshana was a ‘traitor’. Raa- 
vana was the first, unfortunately by no means the last, to dub him by 
that name. Those who are anxious to retain the support of kinsfolk 
while pursuing evil ways disapprove of Vibheeshana's conduct. But 
Vibheeshana was not afraid of being called a trailitor. He would 
have nothing to do with adharma. His course was, however, not 
easy as we shall see. 

The Vaanara chieftains standing on the northern seashore saw 
all of a sudden the sky lit up with a golden glow like the summit of 
Mount Meru. It was too steady to be a flash of lightning. 

In the brightness could be distinguished the forms of five big 
Raakshasas. Sugreeva, the king and commander of the Vaanaras , 
looking at them said: “There is no doubt these are Raakshasas come 
fro>n Lanka with hostile designs.” 

On hearing this, the Vaanara warriors armed themselves with 
trees and boulders and said: “Let us go. We shall intercept and 
slay them and bring them down to earth.” 

Vibheeshana, hearing these words of the Vaanaras, showed no 
signs of fear but from above with calm courage spoke out in a clear 
voice: 

“Vibheeshana stands here before you, the brother of Raavana, 
the wicked king of the Raakshasas. I am here before you, none other 
than brother to Raavana, who killed Jataayu and carried off Seeta by 
force and is now keeping her a prisoner in Lanka. 

“In vain I strove to turn him from his wicked designs and coun¬ 
selled him to restore Seeta and seek Raama’s forgiveness. All the res* 
ponsc l got was disdain and public insult. Hence I am standing here 
before you. Renouncing kingdom, wife and children, I seek service 
and sanctuary at Raama’s feet. I pray you, convey this in¬ 
formation to Raama.” 

Sugreeva mistrusted the good faith of the Raakshasa king’s 
brother and reported thus to Raama: “Vibheeshana, the brother 
of Raavana, has come here with four Raakshasa friends seeking san¬ 
ctuary at your feet. They are standing'there in the sky. Consider 
well, you who are skilled in affairs, what should be done now. These 
Raakshasas are adepts in duplicity. They can make themselves in¬ 
visible and do many other tricks. They have all the skill and courage 
of the wicked. One cannot trust them. I believe that^hese Raaksha¬ 
sas have been sent by Raavana himself. 

“They have come here to mix with us for subversive purposes. 
Or else they intend seeking an opportunity to assassinate the leaders 
in our camp. Whatever Vibheeshana may say, we cannot forget that 



256 


RAAMAAYANA 


he is the brother of our foe. By birth he belongs to the wicked Raa - 
kshasa race. How can we trust him? This is some trick of Raavana, 
I have no doubt. It is best to kill Vibheeshana and his companions 
right now. If we admit him into our camp, he will betray us at the 
first opportunity and return to his own people. Permit us, therefore, 
to destroy forthwith Raavana’s brother and his followers.*’ 

Having thus frankly expressed his feelings at the sight of the 
Raakshasa , Sugreeva stood in silence, awaiting Raama’s reply. 

Raama listened and turned to Hanumaan and other leaders and 
said: 

“You have heard the words of the King who is well-versed in 
policy. Raavana’s brother has come and waits there for our pleasure. 
I wish to know your opinion on this matter. In times of crisis, one 
should ask for the advice of friends. Tell me without reservation 
what you feel in your hearts.” 

Angada, the Vaanara prince said: “He has come from our 
enemy’s camp. We do not know whether he has come of his own 
accord or was sent by our foe. While perhaps it would not be right 
to reject him out of hand, it would be dangerous to accept him 
without testing him. Let us at least watch his behaviour carefully 
without giving him any opening for mischief. If his movements 
are suspicious, we can throw him out. If they are friendly and show 
good faith, we shall accept him.” Thus spoke the son of Vaali. 

Sarabha said: “I do not think it safe to admit him now, to decide 
later what to do with him. Even now, let us test him through skilful 
questioners and decide once for all what to do with him.” 

Jaambavaan said: “Nothing can be discovered by testing such 
persons. If he is come here hiding treacherous intentions, no test can 
discover the truth. Raavana is our inveterate foe. His brother says 
that he has all of a sudden broken with him and come over to us. 
This sudden rupture with a brother is hard to believe. 

“We have not yet crossed the sea. What is his motive in seeking 
safety with us while we are on this hither shore? Ail this is very 
suspicious. They are a deceitful race. I think we should not admit 
him.” 

Mainda said: “How can we reject a man on mere suspicion? 
Only after careful examination can we decide how to deal with him. 
He says that he has forsaken Raavana and come over to us. We can 
find out the truth of this statement. Some of us Should talk to him 
and then decide. Surely we have enough ability to do this.” 

Then Raama turned to Hanumaan the wise. 



CHAPTER LXV 


THE DOCTRINE OF SURRENDER AND GRACE 

In response to Raama’s invitation, Hanumaan expressed his opinion 
in clear, sweet and pregnant words: 

“Why should you ask for our advice? Not even Brihaspati has 
anything to tell you that you do not already know. If it is dangerous 
to admit Vibheeshana, how is the danger met by delay and trial? 
Where is the time or opportunity for a test? Moreover, Vibheeshana 
has not approached us stealthily. He has come to us with frank 
openness and a clear object. What is there for scouts to discover 
about him? It has been said by some that his sudden advent is sus¬ 
picious. But why? What wonder is there if Vibheeshana became 
disgusted with Raavana and foresaw his certain disgrace and a defeat? 
What wonder is there if he recognised your heroic virtues and nobility 
and the certainty of your victory? 

“To me the time and manner of his coming give no room for 
suspicion. It has been suggested that before admitting him our leaders 
should put him questions and examine his answers. But one who 
knows that he is suspected would cease to speak or behave naturally. 
He would be afraid that we are out to find only faults in him. And 
thus his real nature will not be revealed. 

“I see no cause for suspicion in the face or speech of this 
Raakshasa suppliant. His care-free looks disclose a guiltless 
heart. The wise say that the face is a perfect mirror of the heart. 
I think that Vibheeshana has come here honestly to seek sanctuary at 
your feet. And there is nothing strange in his action. He knows 
Raavana’s real weakness. He knows that the lord of Lanka is fated 
to fall. He knows too that you have slain Vaali and given his king¬ 
dom to Sugreeva. Granting that his real motive is to secure for him¬ 
self the sovereignty of Lanka, there is nothing wrong in it and certainly 
it is a guarantee that he will be loyal to us. Hence 1 fed that we should 
admit him.” 

The Vaanara chiefs thus differed in their views. 

Kumbhakarna acted according to ordinary morality. This was 
a simple thing which everybody could understand. But Vibheeshana 
followed a higher morality. The path he chose was more difficult 
and likely to be blamed. He knew (how could anyone else know?) 
his inward suffering at the thought of Raavana’s evil doings. Ordinary 
people could not sympathise with his situation. Hence the Vamaras 
failed to understand the conflict in his mind. Even today people find 



258 


RAAMAAYANA 


it hard, without elaborate explanation, to appreciate Vibheeshana 
aright. 

Patiently, Raama listened to the various views of the Vaanara 
chiefs. When at last he heard Hanumaan’s words he was filled with 
joy. 

Raama, steadfast in his own dharma , found satisfaction in Hanu¬ 
maan’s utterance. A good man is glad when a friend’s opinion sup¬ 
ports his decision on a question of duty. 

“If a man comes as a friend,” said Raama, “how can I reject him? 
It is against the law of my life. All of you, my friends and helpers, 
should know this. Once a man surrenders himself, one should over¬ 
took all his faults.” 

But Sugreeva was not satisfied. He said: 

“This Raakshasa has on his own showing deserted his brother 
whose cause he considers lost. How can one put faith in a person 
who forsakes his own brother in his need?” 

Vaalmeeki records that on hearing these words of Sugreeva, 
Raama turned to Lakshmana with a smile. Probably the smile was 
provoked by Sugreeva’s forgetfulness of his own fraternal conduct 
in his indignant condemnation of Vibheeshana! 

Raama said to Sugreeva: “I see what you mean. But listen. 
It is natural for kings to suspect brothers and neighbour-kings. Good 
kings who entertain no such suspicion are exceptions. Most kings 
imagine that brothers envy them. What wonder then if Raavana 
suspected and insulted Vibheeshana? It follows that Vibheeshana 
feared danger to himself if he stayed on in Lanka. I conclude therefore 
that he has no sinister motive against us in coming here for refuge. 
Let us go further and grant that he has eyes on the kingdom, expecting 
Raavana’s defeat at our hands. Even in this ambition there is nothing 
wrong. Well, Lakshmana, can we expect all people to be like our 
Bharata?” 

Having said this, Raama was silent for a moment, lost in re¬ 
membrance of Bharata’s selfless love. # 

Then he spoke: “Who in the world is as lucky as I am? Who 
has a brother like Bharata? And what a father I had! His love for 
me was so great that his life fled when I came away to the forest. 
And my friends, who else is blessed like me with friends such as 
you?” 

Having spoken thus he wiped the tears in his eyes, and went back 
to the subject on hand. 

“I see no point in the argument that Vibheeshana will forsake 
us, as he has forsaken his brother. He had cause for forsaking his 
brother, and can have none for leaving us. We do not want Lanka, 



THE DOCTRINE OF SURRENDER AND GRACE 


259 


and if, as is natural, he wants it, he can get it only through our victory. 
From the point of view of policy, it would be a mistake to reject 
Vibheeshana. / 

“But there is a stronger reason. When one comes to me for 
refuge, I cannot reject him. This is my dharma. It does not matter 
if as a result of this I suffer. Even at the cost of life I must do this 
duty of mine. Never can I deviate from it. Verily, I tell you, even 
if Raavana himself came to me for sanctuary, I would accept him with¬ 
out hesitation. How then can I reject his brother who has done me 
no wrong? Go and fetch Vibheeshana.” 

“My Lord Raama! It is wonderful how clearly the right 
stands out demonstrated when you speak!” said Sugreeva. “I see 
things clearly now. I shall go and bring Vibheeshana. May he too 
become a loving friend of yours, even like us!” And Sugreeva went 
to fetch Vibheeshana. 

In the Vaishnava tradition, this episode, in which Vibheeshana 
is taken by the Prince into his camp and innermost council, is held 
to be as important as the Bhagavad Gita episode in the Mahaabhaarata . 

It illustrates the doctrine that the Lord accepts all who in absolute 
surrender seek shelter at his feet, regardless of their merits or defects. 
Their sins are burnt out by the mere act of surrender. This is a mes¬ 
sage of hope to erring humanity. It is the heart of the Vaishnava 
faith that there is hope for the worst of us if only we surrender our¬ 
selves to the Lord. 

But why should I restrict this doctrine to the Vaishnava tradition? 
Is not this the heart of all thp religious traditions in our land, yes, and 
of all the religions in the world? Every world teacher stresses this 
certainty of relief and redemption. It is not to Arjuna only that 
Krishna said: “Have no fear, cast off all doubt, I shall destroy all 
your sins.” Wherever in the world God has spoken to mankind in 
a human voice, He has given this assurance. 

There are two ways in which we can regard Vaalmeeki’s account 
of Raama’s acceptance of Raavana’s brother. The poet describes 
the rules of policy, the matters to be examined before one can accept 
a visitor from the enemy’s camp. This is shown in the speeches of the 
Vaanara king, the cultured and accomplished Hanumaan and Raama, 
the firm upholder of dharma . But in addition to%right policy, we see 
here Raama’s character and personality due to nature and nurture. 

He said: “I cannot reject anyone who comes to me for protec¬ 
tion. This is my dharma. If Raavana himself came to me, I would 
not reject him.” 

Those who look on Raama as an avataar of God find in this 
utterance the essence of scripture. The solemn assurance which 



260 


RAAMAAYANA 


Krishna gives to Arjuna later in the Gita, that assurance the Prince 
of Ayodhya declares in the presence of Sugreeva and others in this 
Vibheeshana episode of the Raamaayana, 

This divine assurance is the life and light that a world, filled with 
sin and darkness, needs. 


CHAPTER LXVI 

THE GREAT CAUSEWAY 

Meanwhile Raavana did something foolish. He sent a scout to 
seduce Sugreeva from his loyalty to Raama. This Raakshasa , Suka 
by name, flew across and in disguise met Sugreeva in secret and with 
every appearance of benevolent solicitude spoke to him thus: 

“Raavana, the king of Lanka has sent me because of his affection 
and regard for you. He sends you his fraternal greetings. You are 
a king and he is another and there is no sense in your staking your 
high heritage and making common cause with a disinherited prince 
against an all-powerful king. 

“If Raavana desired Raama’s wife and carried her off, how does 
it concern you? What do you lose by it? Consider well and choose 
your course with discretion. It is most expedient that you and your 
army should return forthwith to Kishkindha.” 

But Sugreeva’s response was scronful and definite: 

“Base fellow! Go and tell your king that he is no brother of mine. 
He is wicked and, being an enemy of my friend Raama, he is my enemy 
too and we are out to rid the world of him and his wicked gang. He 
is a fool to imagine that he can offend Raama and still survive. Tell 
him that there is no escape for him. Tell him all this as from me.” 

When Sugreeva delivered this message to the Raakshasa spy, the 
Vaanaras caught hold of him and began to handle him roughly but 
Raama sternly forbade it and set him free to go the way he came. The 
spy rushed back to Lanka and conveyed the result of his adventure 
to Raavana. 

As soon as Vibheeshana’s adherence was accepted by Raama, 
Lakshmana and Sugreeva crowned Vibheeshana king of Lanka and 
performed the abhisheka with sea water. Vibheeshana pledged un¬ 
changing friendship to Raama and Raama in turn gave his word that 
he would not return to Ayodhya without slaying Raavana. 

Then Sugreeva, Vibheeshana and Lakshmana deliberated on 
how to cross the sea. They thought it best to begin with a prayer to 
the ocean-god and submitted their opinion to Raama. 



THE GREAT CAUSEWAY 


261 


Raama accepted their counsel and, spreading darbha grass on the 
seashore and laying himself on it, began a fast, addressing his request 
for a passage across, to the king of the sea. 

For three days he prayed to the god of the sea but received no 
response. Then Raama, his eyes glowing with anger at the sea-god’s 
arrogance, turned to Lakshmana and said: 

“The low-minded mistake courtesy and gentleness for want of 
strength. Mildness is simply wasted on them. See now how 1 shall 
bring this misproud sea to its senses with my arrows which shall not 
only choke it with the carcasses of mighty fish but even dry it up with 
their fierce odour. Bring me my bow and quiver, O Soumitra!” 

Then bow in hand and blazing with wrath like the destroying fire 
at the end of the world he shot arrows irresistible as thunderbolts into 
the bosom of the sea. These missiles of power disturbed the sea to 
its depths carrying death and dismay to all it contained and presently 
the tortured waters began to exhale steam in their agony. It looked 
as though Raama in his wrath would convert the sea with its infinitude 
of waters into a desert of blazing dust bereft of all life. The sea-god 
could stand it no longer. Shining like the rising sun behind Mount 
Meru, he appeared and stood before Raama. 

With folded hands he said: 

“My Lord Raamachandra! I am subject to the laws of nature 
like the earth, the air, space, light, and all constituents of the universe. 
How can I depart from my nature, which is to be vast, deep, wave- 
filled, impassable? But this I can do. Ask the Vaanaras to bring 
boulders and trees to build a causeway. I shall permit it. I shall 
help you by receiving and keeping in place the rocks and trees. 
This is all that 1 can do and I shall also show the most favourable place 
for this causeway. 

“There is Nala, son of Viswakarma, with you who has the ability 
to build this path. May victory be yours.” 

Raama, true to his nature, graciously accepted the sea-god’s 
apology and offer of help. And then, ordered by Raama, they all 
began to work. Thousands of Vaanaras went at it with enthusiasm 
and soon finished building the causeway. 

Vaalmeeki describes the work at length. He sings with gusto of 
the noise and confusion of the gigantic project. The Vaanaras went 
to the mountains and forests and, plucking rocks and trees, dragged 
them to the shore. The bigger Vaanarai brought big boulders and 
threw them into the sea. As they fell down, the water splashed up 
sky-high. Nala stood and supervised their labours. The leaders in 
charge of companies kept them active. On top of the rocks and trees, 
when the base was firm, a dressing of grass and little pieces of wood 



262 


RAAMAAYANA 


was given to produce a level surface. The noise raised by the dam- 
builders drowned the roar of the ocean. 

The construction was complete. The new path shone across 
the sea like the milky way in the sky. Hosts of gods above rejoiced, 
as hosts of Vaanaras shouted below in exultation. The gods and the 
rishis uttered benedictions. 

Then they went on the causeway. Hanumaan carried Raama 
on his shoulders and Angada carried Lakshmana on his. The Vaa- 
nara army crossed the sea. 

There is a principle expounded here. As Raama stood bow in 
hand, the ocean-god bowed before him with clasped hands and said: 

“Dear Raamachandra! Earth, air, ether, water, fire—these five 
elements must follow the eternal laws of their nature. Tempted by 
pleasure or reward or frightened of punishment, can I ever swerve 
from my nature? Can water harden and become stone? Or can I 
reduce my depths into a shallow pond for your easy crossing?*’ 

Thus the ocean king protested with all politeness to Sri Raama. 

Vaalmeeki puts into the mouth of ocean a fundamental of our 
religious philosophy. He explains the primordial relationship bet¬ 
ween God and Nature. God’s law operates in and through Nature. 
The laws of nature were created so that the universe may proceed by 
itself. So too the law of Karma . The five elements, all objects with¬ 
out life as well as all living creatures, must follow their own permanent 
laws. 

According to the Hindu Shaastras , Nature itself, the sequence and 
chain of cause and effect, the properties of matter, and the law of 
Karma , all are ordained permanently by God. 

Nature itself is a witness to God; He is not proved by a suspension 
of the laws of nature. 

This is expounded clearly in the 9th Chapter of the Bhagavad Gita : 

“Under my supervision Nature gives rise to all that exists— 
movable and immovable—and the universe evolves from this cause.** 

This is put briefly by Vaalmeeki in the speech of the ocean king. 

Maalyavaan, the aged Raakshasa , tried his best to impress on 
Raavana the error of his ways. He said: ♦ 

“Your time of good fortune is over. Your sins have begun to 
bear their fruit and to dim your radiance. You can trust no longer 
the boons you have obtained from the gods. Make peace with your 
enemies. Look at the army that has arrived, the terrible host of 
Vaanaras and bears. Look at this wonderful causeway so quickly 
built. It seems to me, this Raama is Vishnu himself come in human 
form.** 

Raavana had no patiehce with such talk. “Your words axe 



THE GREAT CAUSEWAY 


263 


wormwood in my ear,” he cried. “It looks as though you too have 
joined my enemies. Are not human beings well known to be weak¬ 
lings? Why are you afraid of this wretched man driven into the forest 
by his father? And he relies on the support of monkeys and bears! 
Of such a man you are afraid. Really I am ashamed of you. Or 
could it be that you cannot bear to see me happy? Why do you talk 
like this to me? I cannot bend before Raama. If it is wrong policy 
or wrong ethics, I cannot help it. You may take it that it is part of 
my nature and I cannot change it. I would far rather die fighting 
than sue before Raama for peace!” 

Maalyavaan replied: “Consider well and do what you think best.” 
And he returned home, uttering the usual benedictory words: 
“Victory to the King! Victory to Raavana!” 

The old man was Raavana’s grandfather. 

Raavana carefully stationed his warriors. He posted Prahasta 
at the eastern entrance, Mahaapaarsva and Mahodara at the southern 
entrance and Indrajit, his illustrious son, accomplished in the arts of 
secret magic, at the western entrance, while he decided himself to 
guard the northern entrance. Viroopaaksha the mighty, was appoint¬ 
ed commander of the army within the city. 

Having ordered the disposition of his forces and chief warriors, 
he felt he had ensured victory. As his end was approaching, he listened 
to no one and foolishly believed himself unconquerable. The ministers 
raised shouts of victory to please the King and then dispersed. 

Raama, Sugreeva, Vibheeshana and others held a council 
of war. Vibheeshana duly laid before the council the information 
gathered by scouts who had gone out and watched Raavana’s 
arrangements. 

“In numbers, strength and courage,” Vibheeshana said, “the 
army now mobilised by Raavana surpasses that with which he opposed 
Kubera. Still I have no doubt of Raama’s victory.” 

Raama distributed his forces to meet Raavana’s disposition and 
assigned-to each commander the task he was to perform. He ordered 
Neela to meet Prahasta at the eastern gate. Angada was to meet 
Mahaapaarsva and Mahodara at the sourthern entrance. At the 
western entrance Hanumaan was to encounter Indrajit, the master of 
black magic. 

“Lakshmana and I shall meet Raavana, the terror of the world, 
and we shall direct the assault on Lanka. Sugreeva, Jaambavaan 
and Vibheeshana shall stay behind with our main army.” 

The army rested for the night on mount Suvela. The following 
morning, standing on the mountain top, they took a good look at 
Lanka, 



264 


RAAMAAYANA 


The beautiful city on the summit of Trikoota seemed as if sus¬ 
pended from the sky. Behind the thick fortress wall the Raakshasa 
army stood sentry, looking like another massive wall. 

Observing the great and beautiful buildings in Lanka, Raama 
was moved to pity. And he said: 

“Alas! Because one person, drawn by the noose of Time, has 
committed a sin, all this wealth and the whole Raakshasa race must 
now be destroyed. Alas that this scion of a noble race should forget 
his real greatness and pull death and destruction on himself and his 
people!” 

Raama continued: “However, we should now bend all our 
thoughts to the task before us—to win this battle and destroy Raa- 
vana. There will be much confusion in the course of the battle. The 
Raakshasas will try to deceive us with many disguises. Let the Vaa - 
naras and bears retain their own shape while fighting. Vibheeshana 
and his friends alone need assume human forms, like Lakshmana 
and myself. The Raakshasas , our enemies, will never take the form 
of man or monkey. They would think it beneath their dignity to do 
so. If we stand together maintaining due order we can know who is 
who, slay our enemies and help our friends.” 


CHAPTER LXVn 

THE BATTLE BEGINS 

The Vaanara army descended from mount Suvela and entered the 
forest adjoining the city of Lanka. As the army burst in like a flood, 
the frightened beasts and birds in the forest fled in all directions. 

Vaalmeeki describes the scene and the event in his characteristic' 
style. Gazing now from below at the mountain fortress and the 
divinely beautiful city constructed by Vtswakarma, Raama was again 
filled with wonder and exclaimed: 

“Oh what beauty! What wealth!” 

The Vaanaras , for their part, noted the Raakshasa warriors’ 
strength and readiness for battle, the thick walls and mighty engines 
of defence. 

From Lanka, all ready for war, the sounds of drums and trumpets 
Issuing from the city increased the eagerness of the Vaanaras for battle. 
The army stood in ordered divisions as instructed by Raama^ 

Looking at Lanka he said, “Lakshmana! Look at the beauty of 
the city.” . - 

His mind turned lo She would have known by now, he 



THE BATTLE BEGINS 


265 


thought, of his arrival with the army and her depressed heart must 
have revived. But he spoke nothing of this and engaged himself in 
the arrangements for the army. 

Suddenly, and without any noise or warning to any one, Sugreeva 
sprang up into the sky and alighted on the terrace on top of a tower 
in Lanka, where he saw Raavana seated clad in red royal robes like a 
thick black cloud seen in the red evening sky. The scar, caused by 
the tusk of Indra’s elephant, shone like a crescent moon on his chest. 

“Raavana! You are caught!” cried Sugreeva. “I am a friend 
and servant of Raama. This is your last day!” 

And he sprang on him, knocked off his crown and gave him a 
mighty blow. The two wrestled together for a long time. Both were 
experts in wrestling. All the tricks of that science were tried by each. 
Raavana was at the end of his resources and so he discarded wrestling 
and took to magic and Sugreeva seeing this disentangled himself and 
sprang back to where Raama was. 

The Vaanara leaders, who saw the son of Soorya return, shouted 
praises and made a great noise of congratulations at this derring-do, 
rash and reckless no doubt, but such as would give the Raakshasas 
some idea of the mettle of the foes they were up against. 

Raama too was glad to see that Sugreeva had returned safe. 
Observing bleeding wounds on his body, he said: 

“Sugreeva! I am filled with wonder and joy at this, your valorous 
exploit. But what you did was not right. It is not for a king to rush 
into risks. How could you suddenly and without consulting anyone 
take such a dangerous course?” 

Sugreeva confessed his fault. 

“True, it was improper to rush into battle without consulting 
you. But when I saw the villain who had insulted Seeta I was over¬ 
whelmed by anger and forgot my duty.” 

The Vaanara army surrounded Lanka on all sides in the manner 
laid down by Raama. 

Raama sent for Angada and said to him: 

“Prince! Take this message from me to Raavana. Tell him, 
‘Great sinner, your end is approaching. Raama waits at your fortress 
gate, ready for battle. Trusting to the boons of the gods, you have 
become proud and wicked. You have troubled the world too long 
and committed too many heinous sins. The time has now come for 
the world to be cleansed of you. If you come out into the open and 
fight and die in battle, your sins will be washed away and you will 
gain a place in the world above as a hero. But if you love your life, 
humbly restore Seeta to her lord and beg for forgiveness. Then you 
can escape with life. Whatever happlhs, you are fit to be king no 



266 


RAAMAAYANA 


longer. The kingdom of Lanka now belongs to Vibheeshana. He 
is worthy to rule and protect his people. If you are not willing to 
surrender and seek safety, then have your obsequies performed in 
advance. Bid final farewell to all your dear possessions in Lanka. 
Prepare for death. Come out and meet Raama in battle.’ Go, 
Angada, deliver this message to Raavana.” 

As instructed by Raama, bold Angada delivered his message: 
“Listen, Raavana. I am the son of Vaali whom you no doubt re¬ 
member. I have come as Raama’s messenger. The time for your 
liberation from sin has come. You may, if you choose, die in battle 
and attain the Swarga of brave men cleansed of your foul sins. But 
if life is dear to you, you may beg it of Raama after humble surrender, 
and he never refuses mercy to a suppliant. If what I have heard about 
you is true, you will elect to fight, which means you choose to die. I 
would advise you to take last leave of your kinsfolk and complete 
your obsequies yourself, for none of your race will be left to perform 
them. Look your last on lovely Lanka!” 

Raavana’s rage flared up like a flame. “Seize him, kill him, the 
villain!” he shouted. 

At once, two Raakshasas caught hold of Angada. He rose in 
the sky carrying these two Raakshasas on either side of him and then 
flung them down. 

He rose higher up and coming down, kicked and broke off the 
tower of the king’s palace. Then with a single leap he returned to 
where Raama was. 

Dazed by Angada’s expoit, the Raakshasas were filled with fear, 
but they did not disclose it. Raavana, too, heaved a heavy sigh at 
the sight of the broken turret. He looked on it as a bad omen. 

As soon as Angada returned, Raama issued orders to the army 
to begin the assault on Lanka. 

CHAPTER LXVm 

SEETA’S JOY 

Sura, the Raakshasa scout, went and reported to Raavana: “I did 
my job according to your instructions. But my efforts were fruitless. 
They were rough with me and made me feel thankful to be allowed to 
come back. Raama, to whom it was sport to sky Viraadha, Ka- 
bandha, Khara and others, has arrived with the army of Sugreeva. 
They have somehow come to know of the place where Seeta is held 
captive. The bears and monkeys have crossed the sea and are stand¬ 
ing ready for battle before Lanka*- The visible earth is covered with 



sbeta’s joy 


267 


this army. There is nothing to be gained by discussions and debates. 
Their hate can only be quenched with our blood, Oh King I Consider 
well what needs to be done, and do it.” 

And then he added with fear, in a suppressed voice: “We # may 
yet escape if Seeta is restored.” 

Raavana was enraged: “What did you say?” he cried. “Let 
no one talk to me of Seeta being restored. They do not know my 
strength who talk like this. I can slay the gods, the Vaanaras , the 
Gandharvas and the Yakshas. My darts can burn up Indra himself and 
Yama too. Wait and see how this wretched fellow Raama and his 
army will be destroyed.” 

Raavana believed what he said. He had dwelt long on his pre¬ 
vious achievements and, filled with pride, had become foolishly obsti¬ 
nate. 

Then he sent for two of his ministers and told them: “Scouts 
have come and reported that a large army has built a causeway to 
Lanka and has come over here. This is indeed strange news, but as 
yet nothing serious has happened. Go and observe the enemy and 
bring me a full and detailed report of their strength.” 

Accordingly, the spies assumed the shape of Vaanaras and coming 
to Raama’s camp and mixing with the other Vaanaras looked all 
around. But Vibheeshana, discovering their disguise, caught hold 
of them and produced them before Raama. They pleaded that they 
were mere messengers sent by their king and prayed for release. 

Raama said: “Show them our army. Let them have a good 
look around before they return. Give them free and full opportunity 
to see our strength. And, Oh you Raakshasa messengers! When 
you go back to Raavana, tell him, ‘The strength on which you relied 
when you carried Seeta away is to be put now to the test. Your for¬ 
tress, your city and your army will be destroyed. Raama’s darts will 
pierce your body.* Yes, convey this message to your king.” 

The spies heard Raama’s words and agreed to convey them to 
their master. Then impelled perhaps by force of habit, they said: 
“Victory to thee!” The Vaanara army took this to be a fine omen. 

The spies went back to Raavana and said: “O King! We were 
discovered by Vibheeshana and were in fear of death but Raama would 
not let them kill us and he ordered our release. King! Our enemies 
are determined. Raama and Lakshmana, Sugreeva the Vaanara king 
and Vibheeshana, they are all of one mind. It i9 difficult for us to 
prevail against an army led by such warriors. We have seen Raama, 
son of Dasaratha. He impressed us as being by himself strong enough 
to destroy our city and army. We have seen the courage of the 
Vaanaras and their eagerness for battle. It is not expedient to try the 



268 


RAAMAAYANA 


fortune of war with them. It seems best to restore Seeta to Raama. 
Do consider what should be done.” 

Of course the advice was sincere and well meant, but Raavana 
coujfi not control his fury. He said: “Even if the whole world 
turns against me, I shall not yield to fear. Even if all the Devas , 
Gandharvas and Vaanaras join together to oppose me, I shall not return 
Seeta. Because you were thrashed by the enemy, you give me this 
cowardly advice. Faint hearts! Where is the foe who can vanquish 
me?” 

Having said this, he went to his high tower and himself surveyed 
the enemy’s strength. His ministers and officers were with him. 

Those who had gone out to reconnoitre described at length the 
Vaanara chiefs and the army behind them. They recounted the 
strength of that huge army of bears and monkeys gathered together 
from the far-flung forests, mountains and river-valleys of the world. 
They spoke of their physical strength and courage, their firm devotion 
to Raama, their unity and eagerness to slay the Raakshasas. All those 
that had gone confirmed this. 

“Look!” one of them said. “That majestic and graceful youth 
with matted locks and bow in hand is Raama. See how he looks 
round him with eyes of love and command and how his glances seem 
to brighten the quarters and to fill all with devotion and confidence. 
The mighty armed warrior near him is his brother Lakshmana, a 
peerless bowman and Raama’s second soul. And look! Next to 
him is Sugreeva, wearing Vaali’s garland. He is the equal of Vaali 
himself. There, next to him you see Vibheeshana, your brother. It 
is not easy to vanquish such warriors. Consider well and take all 
steps necessary for victory in such a situation.” 

As the ministers extolled the strength of the enemy, Raavana’s 
rage grew more and more furious. This is the way of a tyrant. The 
wise king is never angry with those who bring him true information 
or with ministers who give him good advice for his welfare; But now 
Raavana’s mind was confused. He had no use for true facte or good 
advice. . - 

His thought followed a strange line. He judged Raama by his 
own character. He thought that, if Seeta could he made somehow 
to yield to him, Raama would return home disgraced and broken¬ 
hearted. Hence he resolved to make one last attempt with a different 
technique. He sought the help of a Raakshasa sorcerer. “Oh Lightn¬ 
ing-Tongue !” he said (that was his name). “Prepare a head which looks 
so exactly like Raama’s that it will deceive Raama’s nearest and dearest 
into believing it is his. When I send for you, come to the park where 
Seeta is incarcerated and place it before her/' 



seeta’s joy 


269 


The sorcerer agreed to do as he was bidden. 

Then Raavana went once again to the Asoka park tried to beguile 
Seeta. 4 ‘Your husband and his army have been destroyed,” he said. 
“My warriors crossed the sea and attacking Raama and his moneys, 
when they were tired and asleep, killed them all. A warrior has 
brought the head of your husband for me to see. Why do you still 
persist in your obstinacy? Join my wives now and reign as their 
chief. Take my advice and become the queen of Lanka.” 

Then he ordered a Raakshasa to fetch Vidyut-Jihva, the sorcerer. 
The conjurer came and placed before Seeta a head which looked ex¬ 
actly like Raama’s. 

Startled by the sight, Seeta cried, “So then, is this my fate?” and 
broke into hopeless lamentation. 

Meanwhile, Raama’s army had come close to Lanka and the 
ministers and generals sent word to Raavana desiring an immediate 
interview. Raavana, therefore, had to leave Seeta at once and go to 
the Assembly Hall. 

Raavana’s presence was necessary to keep up the sorcerer’s 
illusion. So, when he left the place, the apparition of Raama’s head 
vanished like smoke. Saram’a, who was a lady of the royal household 
posted as a companion of Seeta, consoled her explaining the illusion. 
She said: “No one has killed Raama. He has reached Lanka at the 
head of a great army. They have built a wonderful causeway across 
the sea and are all over Lanka like a submerging sea. The Raakshasas 
are panic-stricken. Raavana is only trying to deceive you through 
sorcery.” 

Sarama went on to inform Seeta: “Several ministers advised 
Raavana to restore you and save himself by unconditional submission. 
But he would not listen to them. T may perish in battle,’ he said, ‘but 
I will not bow, a suppliant before Raama. I shall never return Seeta 
and sue for peace,* Holy lady! No harm can come to you. Raama 
will surely triumph and this wicked one will perish.” 

Even as Sarama was speaking, the noise of the drums and trumpets 
sounded by the Vaanara army reached Seeta’s ears and filled her with 
joy. She knew that Raavana’s end was near. The Raakshasas in 
Lanka heard the same noise and trembled in fear. 



CHAPTER LX1X 


SERPENT DARTS 

Raavana was duly informed that Raama’s Vaanara host surround¬ 
ed Lanka like a tumultuous sea. In an angry mood he went up the 
tower of his mansion and surveyed the scene. On every side he saw 
Vaanara warriors who had armed themselves with trees and boulders. 
He wondered how he could destroy this vast invading force. 

As the same time, Raama saw the city of Lanka guarded by the 
Raakshasas . He could see with his mind’s eye the sad figure of Seeta 
held captive within those walls. He ordered an immediate assault. 

Shouting ‘Victory to the Vaanara king!’ ‘Victory to Raama and 
Lakshmana!’ ‘Perish Raakshasas !’, the Vaanara army rushed on the 
doomed city. Some hurled big boulders against the fortress wall and 
on the city gates. Others armed with huge trees torn up by the roots 
rushed on the Raakshasas . 

Then Raavana sent forth a big army. He commanded it to go 
out and slay at once all the Vaanaras . They beat their drums and 
blew their trumpets till the sky resounded. They fell upon the Vaanaras . 
The Vaanaras used boulders and trees and their own nails and fists to 
oppose the Raakshasas. Thousands fell dead on either side. The 
field was covered with blood and mangled bodies. 

Besides this gruesome engagement, there were many duels between 
individual warriors. Angada encountered Indrajit like Rudra against 
Yama. There was a duel between the Raakshasa Prajangha and 
Sampaati, one of the companions of Vibheeshana. Hanumaan fought 
a duel with Jambumaali, Neela with Nikumbha, Lakshmana with 
Viroopaaksha, and so on. The chariot and horses of Indrajit were 
destroyed and Angada received u blow from the Mace of Indrajit. 
Jambumaali hit Hanumaan with his weapon and Hanumaan smashed 
his chariot to pieces. The Raakshasas concentrated their attack on 
Raama, and fell in thousands under his arrows. 

Vidyunmaali aimed his darts at Sushena. The latter smashed 
with a rock the chariot of the Raakshasa . VidyuMfifraali jumped 
out with his mace and attacked Sushena who crushed him to death 
with a rock. In this way many warriors fought add many died. 

The battle raged throughout the day. And at night the Raak¬ 
shasas would not stop fighting. The battle became fierce. Blood 
flowed in streams. There was terrible slaughter on both sides. 
Angada attacked Indrajit, slew his horses and charioteer and smashed 
the chariot. The Vaanaras admired the skill and strength of their 
prince and raised shouts of joy. All the warriors in the army praised 



SERPENT DARTS 


271 


the Vaanara prince’s prowess. Indrajit lost his temper along with his 
chariot and resorted to sorcery. Making himself invisible he aimed 
many darts at Raama and Lakshmana who were greatly harassed 
at this attack from a foe whose whereabouts no one could discover 
and who seemed to shower deadly missiles from all sides. 

Then Indrajit shot serpent darts at Raama and Lakshmana. 
Bound by them, they could not move and lay helpless on the battle¬ 
field. They looked at one another, wondering what to do. Laksh- 
mana’s grief at Raama’s plight was great. As for the Vaanaras , 
they stood round in mournfiul bewilderment. 

Indrajit congratulated the Raakshasa army and returned to the 
city. Exulting in his victory, he went to his father and announced 
that the story of Raama and Lakshmana was over. Raavana 
was beside himself with joy. He embraced his son and praised his 
prowess. 

The Vaanara warriors, wounded and downcast, seeing Raama and 
Lakshmana laid low, concluded that all was over. Vibheeshana, 
who saw Sugreeva standing helpless and forlorn, put courage in the 
Vaanara king. “It is foolish to lose hope,” he said. “Look at Raama 
and Lakshmana. Their faces are still bright. They are not dead. 
Be not afraid. Soon they will recover from this swoon and resume 
fighting.” 

The chief took heart and did everything to save the army from 
panic. The ranks were re-formed with their respective chiefs. 

Meanwhile Raavana had it proclaimed in Lanka that Raama 
and Lakshmana had been slain by Indrajit. He sent for his women 
and said to them: “Go at once and inform Seeta that Raama is 
no more; that the two princes lie dead on the battlefield and the Vaanara 
army is destroyed. Also, to convince her finally/ take her in the Push- 
paka Vimaana and show her the battlefield from above. Let the 
obstinate one see for herself what has happened. Seeing that she has 
now no one to look to besides myself, she will turn to me.” 

The Raakshasis did as they were told. From the Vimaana Seeta 
saw the field of battle. She saw Raama and Lakshmana lying motion¬ 
less on the ground with their weapons scattered by their side. She 
was filled with grief. She thought that it was now all over and cried: 
“To this end has fate brought me, giving the lie to the predictions of 
saints and astrologers that I would live as a happy wire and mother 
and a glorious queen. Poor Kausalya! Who shall console you 
now? Like one, who having crossed the ocean gets drowned In a 
little pond, these warriors, who had done so much, lie dead now. Oh 

r inces! How did your divine weapons fail you? Alas, all-powerful 
destiny 1” 



272 


RAAMAA Y ANA 


When Seeta was thus in the desperation of utter sorrow, Trijata, 
her Raakshasi companion, who was looking closely at the motionless 
figures of the princes, suddenly burst out: ‘‘Dear Seeta, there is 
no cause for grief. Neither your husband nor Lakshmana is dead. 
Look at their faces. Is this how the dead look? They are bound by 
a charmed weapon and are unconscious for a while. Look at the 
orderly array of the army. Have courage. Be not frightened.” 
Her words fell like nectar in Seeta’s ears. The Vimaana returned 
to Lanka and Seeta was taken back to the Asoka Vana . 

In time, the force of the arrows charged with sorcery weakened. 
Raama opened his eyes and sat up. Though sorely wounded, he 
recovered his strength by an exercise of will-power and sat up. He 
looked at his brother lying on the ground and cried out: “Alas! 
What is the use of victory now for me? Why did I bring you, dear 
brother, with me to the forest and get you killed like this? How 
can I return without you to Ayodhya? You used ever to console 
me in my sorrow. You are silent now when I face the greatest sorrow. 
How can I survive you? Where in the world is a warrior like you? 
One can replace anything lost, but where can I find anyone to fill 
your place? 

“Like Kaartaveeryaarjuna with his thousand hands, you with 
your two hands discharged showers of arrows and slew the Raakshasas. 
How could death come to you? You came with me into the forest, 
and now I shall repay my debt to you be joining with you to the abode 
of Yama. I confess defeat. The word I gave to Vibheeshana cannot 
be fulfilled. Oh Vaanara king! Return to Kishkindha with all 
your warriors. You have worked hard for me. You have fulfilled 
ail the duties of friendship. You have my gratitude. But there is 
no use in more of you dying. Go back to your city. Let me perish 
here.” Thus did Raama lament in helpless grief. 

Then Vibheeshana arrived there, mace in hand. Seeing his 
huge dark form, the Vaanaras imagined it was Indrajit again and 
started to fly. ; v 

In another part of the battlefield Sugreeva and Angada were 
discussing. “Why are the Vaanaras thus beginning to scatter in fear? 
What has happened?” asked Sugreeva. 

Angada answered: “Do you not know that Raama and Laksh¬ 
mana are lying wounded?” 

Sugreeva said: “It is not that. Look at the way they are run¬ 
ning helter-skelter. There must be some other reason for it.” 

Then he learnt that the Vaanaras , who had suffered at the hands 
of Indrajit, mistook Vibheeshana for him and were frightened# He 
sent Jaambavaan to rally the troops by disabusing them of this fear. 



raavanVs defeat 


273 


Vibheeshana looked at Raama and Lakshmana. When he 
saw them wounded, covered with arrows all over, and unable to 
fight, he broke down crying, “It is all over. What more is there to 
do?” 

Sugreeva turned to Sushena, his uncle, and said: “Take Raama 
and Lakshmana to Kishkindha. I shall kill Raavana, redeem Seeta, 
and bring her there.” 

Sushena answered: “There are herbs which can heal the wounds 
of the princes and restore them to health. Some of us know where 
these herbs are to be found. Here is Hanumaan. If you send him, 
he will fetch the herbs.” 

As they were speaking, the sea and air were churned up by a 
mighty wind and the great bird Garuda burst into view. 

When Garuda arrived, the serpent darts that covered Raama 
and Lakshmana disappeared instantaneously. They were all veno¬ 
mous serpents which had become arrows through the magic of Indrajit 
and had bound the princes’ bodies. When their inveterate and dreaded 
enemy Garuda appeared, they took flight. Then Garuda gently 
stroked the bodies of Raama and Lakshmana and restored to them 
their full strength. The wounds were all healed and they rose up, 
stronger and more radiant than before. 

And Raama asked: “Who are you, my benefactor?” He did 
not know that he was Vishnu and Garuda was his own bird on which 
he always rode. 

Garuda answered: “I am your good friend, and old companion. 
Glory be yours! Let me go now. When the battle is ended, we 
shall know each other better.” Saying thus Hari’s bird flew away. 

Seeing Raama and Lakshmana fully recovered and ready for 
battle, the Vaanaras were enthusiastic once again and resumed attack¬ 
ing Raavana’s fortress. 


CHAPTER LXX 

RAAVANA’S DEFEAT 

Raavana from within his palace was surprised to hear, borne on 
the wind* the jubilant acclamations of the Vaanaras , who he thought 
must then be mourning their vanquished leaders and slaughtered 
comrades. He turned to the Raakskasas standing beside him and 
asked: “What has happened to make the Vaanaras so happy? 
Something strange must have occurred. Go and find out what it is.” 
Some Raakskasas climbed up and looked over die wall. Re* 
n.—10 



274 


RAAMAAYANA 


turning, they said to Raavana with fear and trembling: “King! The 
Vaanara army, led by Sugreeva, is attacking the fortress with spirit. 
Raama and Lakshmana are both alive. Like elephants that have 
broken their bonds, Raama and Lakshmana have shaken off the 
naaga darts with which lndrajit bound them and have rejoined the 
army and are raging about the field like hungry lions. The darts 
of lndrajit have proved futile.” 

Raavana’s face fell. He was filled with anxiety and said: “I 
marvel at what you say. No one till now has escaped these darts. 
If those weapons were powerless against these men, we are indeed 
in danger.” 

Then with an access of anger, he shouted: “Listen, Dhoom- 
raaksha! Why should I worry when you are here? Get together all 
the men you want. Go at once and destroy these two little men 
and return quickly.” 

Dhoomraaksha was indeed happy and proud to be thus singled 
out by the king. He took a party of warriors and, issuing out of 
the fort, came into contact with the group who, under Hanumaan, 
were attempting to enter the western gate. In the battle that ensued 
there was great slaughter on both sides. In the end Dhoomraaksha 
was slain by Hanumaan. A few Raakshasas escaped into the fortress, 
but most of them lay dead without. 

News of this discomfiture filled Raavana with uncontrollable 
fury. He hastily summoned Vajradamshtra and said: ‘Oh bravest 

of warriors, go without delay and destroy these wicked fellows.” 

Vajradamshtra bowed low before the king and followed by a 
mighty army sallied out of the southern gate and encountered Angada. 

The Raakshasas under the leadership of Vajradamshtra waged 
grim battle and slew countless Vaanaras . And yet the Vaanara 
army stood firm and would not withdraw. Armed with boulders 
and trees, they killed innumerable Raakshasas . On both sides the 
fighting was intense. In the end, Angada and the Raakshasa chief 
fought hand to hand for a long while. Vajradamshtra was slain, 
gallantly fighting to the last, and the Raakshasas fled in confusion. 
The Vaanaras surrounded Angada and shouted in exultation. 

Then Raavana ordered Prahasta: “Send Akampana and let 
him have the most terrible Raakshasas to accompany him. Let 
them go and slay Raama, Sugreeva and the Vaanara army. None 
can resist Akampana’s might and skill.” 

Accordingly, Prahasta sent an army of Raakshasas under the 
leadership of Akampana. True to his name, Akampana was firm 
and immovable in battle. He had chosen his weapons and his warriors 
carefully. As he advanced, bad omens met him. But neither he. 



raavana’s defeat 


275 


nor his followers regarded them. The noise of their challenge rose 
above that of the ocean. 

A great battle ensued. Blood flowed in streams. Dust rose 
and cut off the sun plunging the earth in portentous gloom. The 
slaughter on both sides was enormous. Kumuda, Nala, Mainda 
and Dwivida attacked Akampana who defended himself with courage. 

The battle went against the Vaanara warriors and they were 
about to take flight when Hanumaan arrived bringing courage and 
hope. Akampana sent forth a shower of arrows at him but Hanu¬ 
maan took no notice and lifting a huge boulder and swinging it above 
his head, hurled it at Akampana. The Raakshasa" s darts intercepted 
the stone and reduced it to powder. Then Hanumaan grew in size 
and shone with blinding brightness like the sun and uprooting a big 
tree attacked the Raakshasa with it and slew him. The Raakshasa 
army was smashed like a forest in an earthquake and the survivors 
fled in panic from the fatal field that was strewn thick with the dead, 
and spread the dismal news in Lanka. The Vaanaras surrounded 
Hanumaan and uproariously expressed their admiration. 

Raavana’s spirits fell when he received the news of Akampana’s 
death but he found strength in anger and desperation and began 
thinking of new plans. He went round the defences of the city again 
and took counsel with Prahasta, the commander-in-chief. 

“We must break this Vaanara siege. We should issue at the 
head of the whole army and slay the Vaanara chiefs. Myself, Kumbha- 
karna, yourself, Indrajit or Nikumbha—one of us five—should take 
up the responsibility of leading the army out of the fortress. Are 
we to be afraid of monekys? Why! They used to flee in terror on 
merely hearing the roar of a Raakshasa. They do not know the 
science of war. They are unskilled brutes. How have they managed 
to stand all our attacks?” 

Prahasta answered humbly: “Things have happened as we 
foresaw. We respectfully submitted long ago that it would be best 
to restore Seeta and make peace. But 1 am bound to obey you. I 
am prepared to sacrifice my life, my family, my all for your sake. 
I shall lead this sortie, if such is your pleasure.” 

A huge army was collected and everything was got ready for a 
supreme endeavour, including the solemnisation of special rites and 
sacrifices. 

Then Prahasta marched out to the beating of drums. Evil 
omens presented themselves. But he disregarded them. 

Seeing the great army led by Prahasta issuing out of the eastern 
gate of the fortress, the Vaanarms roared with joy and prepared for 
battle. 



276 


RAAMAAYANA 


Like moths rushing at a flame, the Raakshasas fell on the Vaanara 
army. 

“Look,** said Raama, “there comes out a Raakshasa at the 
head of an enormous army. Who is he?” 

Vibheeshana replied: “It is Prahasta, the commander-in-chief 
of Raavana. A third of the imperial army is his to command.” 

Then ensued a grim battle between the Vaanaras armed with 
boulders and trees and the Raakshasas equipped with swords, spears, 
bows and axes. Exchanging showers of stones for arrows and grap¬ 
pling in death grips at close quarters, both sides fought fiercely, deluging 
the field with blood. 

Prahasta’s followers, Naraantaka, Mahaanaada, Kumbhahanu 
and others, were opposed by Dwivida, Durmukha and Jaambavaan, 
and slain. There was a prolonged battle between Prahasta and 
Neela. At last Prahasta armed with a massive mace of iron rushed 
towrds Neela. Neela, for his part, uprooted a big boulder and with 
it smashed Prahasta’s head killing him on the spot. 

The Raakshasa warriors fled in all directions. After this great 
victory, Neela went to Raama and Lakshmana and, bowing low, 
told them what happened. Raama and Lakshmana praised his 
prowess and congratulated him. 

Some of those who fled from the battle carried to the Raakshasa 
King the news that Neela, son of Agni, had slain Prahasta. Raavana 
was beside himself with rage and grief. “My warrior-chief,” he said, 
“who could vanquish Indra and his hpst of gods, has been killed by 
these Vaanaras . We cannot treat this lightly. We must destroy 
Raama and the monkey host.” So saying, Raavana got into 
his chariot and went forward like Rudra the destroyer. Seated in 
his radiant chariot and issuing from the city, Raavana beheld the 
Vaanara army and heard their uproar which resounded like the ocean. 

Seeing a new Raakshasa army issuing out, the Vaanaras stood 
ready to receive them with stones and trees in hand. Vibheeshana 
pointed out the Raakshasa warriors one by one to Raama. “There, 
seated in the chariot and shining like the rising sun, is Indrajit.” 
And so he went on from one renowened warrior to another till he 
came to Raavana. “There, in the big chariot, radiant like the sun, 
sits the ten-headed Raavana.** 

Raama beheld the majestic and glowing form with interest and 
pity. “A great warrior no doubt,” he said, “but he is so wicked that 
he has to be slain.’* / 

Raavana attacked innumerable Vaanaras and laid them low. 
Neela opposed Raavana gallantly bet was felled by a fire-dart. Hanu- 
maan attacked Raavana with violence and the two fought an equal 



THE GIANT IS ROUSED 


277 


battle for a while but Raavana could not be subdued and wrought 
great havoc in the Vaanara host. 

There was a fight between Lakshmana and Raavana. Lakshmana 
fell down unconscious but Hanumaan intervened and carried 
Lakshmana away to Raama. 

Then Raama, riding on Hanumaan’s shoulders, gave battle to 
Raavana. The Raakshasa king was sorely wounded. His golden 
crown was broken. So was his chariot. Deprived of every weapon, 
he stood before Raama. 

“You may go now,” said Raama. “You have fought well today. 
Go away and rest and come back tomorrow, refreshed and with 
weapons.” And Raavana retreated shamefacedly to the city. 


CHAPTER LXXI 

THE GIANT IS ROUSED 

When Raavanh returned humbled and dejected, the gods rejoiced 
foreseeing the speedy end of their troubles. Raavana entered the 
fortress, ashamed and anxious. After deliberating a while, he re¬ 
covered his courage and ordered his sleeping brother Kumbhakarna 
to be roused. 

As the result of a curse, Kumbhakarna used to sleep for months 
together and he had gone to sleep just a few days before the events 
last narrated. Raavana asked his ministers to spare no efforts to 
rouse Kumbhakarna at once and get him ready for battle. 

“All my penances have proved futile. It looks as though the 
prophecy of the rishis will be fulfilled,” thus said Raavana to himself, 
but rooted in his determination to fight to the last, he issued orders 
as if he were certain of ultimate success: 

“Let the warriors guard the fortress on all sides. My brother 
is sound asleep. He sleeps blissfully, unaware of my anxiety. He 
will not wake up for months together if left alone. It is only nine 
days since he started sleeping. Rouse him at once. If he wakes up 
and goes to the battle, the enemy will be surely scattered. Who can 
stand before my Kumbhakarna? If he wakes up and opposes my 
enemies in battle, I need have no fear.” 

Raavana’s officers and their servants accordingly went to Kumbha- 
karna’s palace. They knew that as soon as he opened his eyes, he 
would be rapaciously hungry. So they first prepared and piled up 
mountains of food for him. Then they made a great din beating 
drums and blowing conchs. Many Raakshasas exhausted themselves 



278 


RAAMAAYANA 


pushing and shaking the huge body of the Raakshasa. The noise 
that they made with their shouts and drums and trumpets filled the 
sky and frightened all the birds and beasts of Lanka, but Kumbha- 
karna in his sleep heard nothing. The Raakshasas worked hard at 
rousing him. They made elephants walk on his body. They tobk 
cudgels and belaboured him. 

At last his eyelids opened slightly and as one might brush away 
a mosquito while still asleep, he pushed them all aside and yawned. 

Kumbhakarna was thus disturbed in his sleep, which otherwise 
would have been months long. But before he could find out the 
cause for this, he began to eat and drink. The heaps of meat and 
the pots of blood and wine kept ready for him were finished. When 
his hunger was somewhat mitigated the Raakshasas approached him 
to acquaint him with the situation. 

Raavana’s minister Yoopaaksha said: “My Lord, we have 
been defeated in battle and stand in grave danger. You will remember 
the quarrel about Seeta. The Vaanaras with Raama and Lakshmana 
have arrived and are breaking through the fort. They have slaughtered 
and defeated our army which never knew defeat before. Lanka is 
surrounded by the Vaanara host as by an ocean. Raavana himself 
went to battle but he retired from the field having had the worst of it. 
It was our good luck that he escaped with life.” 

Hearing this, Kumbhakarna was beside himself with rage. 
“This very instant I shall go and destroy this enemy. I shall kill 
the Vaanaras and drink the blood of Raama and Lakshmana. After 
finishing this first, I shall go and wait on the King.” 

The ministers were delighted to hear this furious speech but 
pleaded with Kumbhakarna that he should first see the King and 
take counsel with him as to what should be done. 

Kumbhakarna agreed, washed his face and then strode in sombre 
majesty to the hall of the King of Lanka. 

The Raakshasas standing on the royal highway felt new courage 
and joy as they saw him pass, and bowed low before him and showered 
flowers on him. He entered the palace and stood in the presence of 
Raavana. Rejoicing at the arrival of his peerless brother, Raavana 
stepped down from his throne and embraced him. 

“What can I do for you, brotherJ” asked Kumbhakarna. 
“Why did you get my sleep broken? What makes you afraid? Tell 
me who is tired of life and wants to be turned into a corpse!” 

“Brother! You do not know what has happened,” said Raavana. 
“You were lost in sleep. The man Raama has become arealmenace 
to me. He has built a dam across the sea we considered inviolate and 
now the Vaanara aimy surrounds Lanka like another *ea. Our 



THE GIANT IS ROUSED 


279 


warriors who sortied out and met them have been defeated and almost 
annihilated. It is for you now to save us from destruction and I 
know you can do it. You have put the gods to rout. 1 know your 
love for me. I know your keenness and your courage in battle. Go 
at once and annihilate these enemies and help us in our need and save 
Lanka.” 

Kumbhakarna, when he heard Raavana’s words of anxiety, 
was moved at first to fury against the enemy but soon he remembered 
the whole story and Raavana’s vain-glorious confidence in his invin¬ 
cibility and that made him smile a little bitterly. He said: “Excuse 
me, my brother. The warning we gave you when you consulted us 
went unheeded. Our fears have come true. You rejected the good 
advice we gave you. Now, you suffer the consequences of your error 
and your sin. You brought away Seeta. What else can happen, 
when, driven by lust, one acts without thinking? If you so desired, 
and you had the confidence and strength, it would have been wise 
first to have slain Raama and Lakshmana and then seized her. You 
have done things without due thought and in the wrong order. When 
one acts without seeking or regarding the advice of wise and faithful 
friends and kinsmen, it is no wonder if he runs into danger and ruin. 
Did you not know that these things must follow? Should not a king 
understand who gives him good advice and who bad?” 

Raavana did not like all this lecturing. He had no use now for 
lessons in ethics or politics. His face flushed with anger but he 
controlled himself and said: “Brother! The time is now past for 
such talk. What I need now is not your criticism but your prowess. 
What is done has been done and it is useless discussing whether it 
was just or unjust, wise or unwise. The question now is what we 
should do in our present predicament. It is your duty now to use 
your strength and skill and ward off the present disasters resulting 
from past errors. He is a true friend and a true kinsman who helps 
one out of the trouble that has been brought on oneself, may be 
because of folly. If indeed you care for me, the time is now to show 
it by helping me instead of commenting on my conduct. I depend 
on your strength and prowess. Out of your infinite courage, give 
me comfort.” 

Kumbhakarna was moved by this appeal. “Have no more 
care,” he said. “I am your brother and can never forsake you. Rest 
assured that Raama and Lakshmana are dead. I shall scatter and 
slay their monkey army. I shall fling at your feet the head of Raama 
and you shall see the Vaanara King’s blood flowing on the battle-field, 
Raama can only approach you, if he does, over my dead body and 
that is not possible, for no one can vanquish or slay me.” 



280 


KAAMAAYANA 


Kumbhakarna’s pride swelled. “No matter who the enemy 
is,” he cried, “I shall destroy him. Be he Yama or Soorya or Agni, 
I shall eat them all up.” In this mood he rushed out to the field 
of battle. 

The sudden waking from deep slumber had completely upset 
his temper, but when his consuming hunger and thirst had been 
appeased, he had recovered his balance and spoke wisdom to Raavana. 
Again seeing Raavana’s plight, fraternal affection and pity made him 
forget everything else. 

Raavana was pleased. “O my true warrior! O my brother! 
What a friend in need I have in Kumbhakarna!” he exclaimed, 
confident that Kumbhakarna would return trimphant and he now 
felt like one recovering from a mortal sickness. 

Kumbhakarna armed with his great spear, was about to go to 
battle alone, but Raavana stopped him and sent an army to aid him. 
He covered his brother’s big body with jewels and garments and 
blessed him saying: “Go my hero! Destroy the enemies and return 
victorious!“ 

Tall and mighty-limbed Kumbhakarna, covered with shining 
jewels, was radiant like Trivikrama himself. He circumambulated 
his brother, bowed and marched out spear in hand at the head of a 
great army, amidst the plaudits of the Raakshasas ,and under a shower 
of flowers and good wishes. As the huge form of Kumbhakarna, 
a giant even among the Raakshasas , was seen stepping across the 
fortress-wall like Yama at the end of Time or some great natural 
cataclysm, the Vaanaras were frightened and started fleeing in all 
directions. With great difficulty their chiefs rallied them and put them 
in battle formation. 


CHAPTER LXXn 

IS THIS NAARAAYANA HIMSELF? 

Rallied by Angada, the Vaanaras recovered courage, re-formed in 
battle order and prepared to receive Kumbhakarna. They hurled 
rocks at him and dealt heavy blows with trees plucked by the roots, 
but he disregarded them all and with a smile on his face went on des¬ 
patching the Vaanaras with a methodic cruelty that was most terrifying. 
Some of them retreated to the newly-built dam, while others tried to 
save themselves by concealing on the shore of the sea and the forests. 
Once again Angada had to encourage the Vaanara chiefs and 
warriors and get them to re-form and attack Kumbhakarna. 



IS THIS NAARAAYANA HIMSELF ? 


281 


Dwivida, Hanumaan, Neela, Vrishabha, Sarabha and other chiefs 
attacked Kumbhakarna fiercely. But he disregarded them all and 
continued his ruthless slaughter of the Vaanaras. Angada himself 
received a blow, as a result of which he fainted and fell on the earth. 
Sugreeva was struck down. Picking up the unconscious Vaanara 
king, Kumbhakarna carried him with joy towards Lanka. The 
Raakshasa army rejoiced greatly and raised a triumphant uproar. 
Kumbhakarna wished to make a present of the captive Vaanara 
King to his brother Raavana. 

, As Kumbhakarna went though the royal highway carrying in 
triumph the unconscious Vaanara King, the Raakshasas and their 
women-folk, standing on the terraces, showered flowers and poured 
sandal paste. This incidentally revived Sugreeva. He opened his 
eyes and wondered where he was and what had happened. He soon 
understood everything. He then began to bite with his teeth and 
tear with his nails the ears and nose of the Raakshasa who was carrying 
him. Worried thus Kumbhakarna threw him down intending to 
crush him with his feet. But when he was once on the ground, Sug¬ 
reeva jumped and flew off across the sky and arrived at the place 
where Raama was. 

Hanumaan was sure that Sugreeva would somehow come back. 
Foreseeing this escape of Sugreeva, Hanumaan had rallied the Vaanara 
ranks and prepared them again for battle. 

Grim and gruesome with torn nose and ears, Kumbhakarna, 
like a great blood-red evening cloud, and raging like Death at the 
end of Time, returned to the battlefield with a huge iron mace in 
his hand. 

None could now stop Kumbhakarna. He began to kill and 
devour the Vaanaras. The whole army began to disappear in this way. 
They tried to deter him by climbing on his mountain-like body and 
tearing at It with nails and teeth but wihtout effect for he shook them 
off as if they were flies. None of the Vaanara chiefs could hold him. 

Lakshmana tried with his arrows to obstruct his progress but 
the Raakshasa passed him by and rushed forward to face Raama 
himself. 

For a long time Raama kept aiming powerful darts at the 
Raakshasa . The arrow that pierced the seven sal trees and the 
adamantine body of Vaali was powerless against Kumbhakarna. 

Sending, sharper and stronger arrows, Raama wounded the arms 
and the feet of the Raakshasa , but nothing short of death would stop 
him. His legs were cut off, but legless he moved about on his stumps 
and went on with demoniac ferocity, fighting his brother's battle. 

At last, Raama cut off his head with an arrow. 



282 


RAAMAAYANA 


The severed head, carried by the force of Raama’s arrow, rose 
into the sky and red with blood, fell in Lanka like a hill with its forests 
aflame. The news was carried to Raavana. 

“Your brother Kumbhakarna, terrible like all-destroying Death 
at the end of Time, has entered the heaven of slaughtered heroes! 
He killed thousands of Vaanaras and for a long time kept the army 
of Raama and Lakshmana in fear of destruction. But at last he 
was slain by Raama himself, and deprived of arms and legs his muti¬ 
lated body lies like a mighty tree disfigured by a forest fire. A part 
has fallen into the sea. Another big part blocks the entrance to the 
fortress. The severed head, flying across the sky, has dropped in the 
city and is lying there. Your beloved brother is gone to Heaven!” 

When the Raakshasas told this tale, Raavana felt that his own 
life had left him. He swooned. 

After recovering consciousness, he cried in grief and anger: 
“Ah mighty warrior! How could you go to Yama’s world leaving 
me behind? My right hand is cut off! How did Raama kill you, 
you whom in the whole world no enemy dared approach? I see the 
gods rejoicing in their heavens at your fail. The Vaanaras are dancing 
with delight. Of what use is this kingdom to me? Why should I 
cling to life when my dear brother has left me? Yes, I have to torture 
and slay the man who killed this dear brother of mine!” 

Then with sudden and futile remorse he wailed: “Alas! Why 
did I refuse to listen to Vibheeshana?” 

Trisiras and his other sons tried to console Raavana. 

“What is the use of lamentation?” they argued. “You who 
have secured from Brahma strength and armour, why should you 
fear or lose yourself in grief?” And Trisiras himself set out for the 
battlefield. Many others eagerly followed him, riding on elephants 
and chariots. 

A great battle ensued. Narrantaka, riding on horse-back spear 
in hand, wrought havoc among the Vaanaras and was proceeding 
towards Sugreeva. Angada opposed him and killed him and his 
horse. 

Likewise, Devaantaka and Trisiras were slain by Hanumaan, 
and Mahodara by Neela. Atikaaya fell a prey to Lakshmana’s 
arrows. But before they died, these four had fought like four Yamas 
and caused enormous loss to the Vaanara forces. 

When Raavana heard that Atikaaya was dead, he was bewildered. 

“This is incredible! These my warriors, firm and mighty like 
mountains and irresistible like the ocean, have been slain one by one 
by these enemies. Those, who till now have never known defeat, 
have been defeated and lie dead in the battlefield. There stand my 



THE DEATH Of INDRAJTT 


283 


foes who have broken out of the serpent entanglements with which 
my peerless son Indrajit had bound them. I cannot explain the 
marvel of this man Raama’s strength. May it be that he is Naaraayana 
himself? 0 

Thus bewildered, Raavana lost heart. He wanted that the enemy 
forces should not enter the fortress and in particular should not enter 
the Asoka Vana. He supervised the defences again and returned 
to the palace, downcast and forlorn. 


CHAPTER LXXII1 

THE DEATH OF INDRAJIT 

Indrajit comforted his father. “Why should you worry when I 
am here alive?” he said and gathered an army, and with it made 
another sortie. 

He swooped down on the Vaanara forces and killed and wounded 
thousands of them. They were helpless against his fury. The 
Brahmaasira of Indrajit was effective against even Raama and Lak- 
Shmana who were tied up by it. They lay unconscious on the ground 
and the Raakshasa prince went straight to his anxious father with the 
glad news of this achievement. 

Vibhecshana rallied the Vaanara leaders who had scattered in 
all directions and put hope and courage into them. 

Jaambavaan, who was more dead than alive, moved slowly among 
the Vaanaras , inquiring, “Is Hanumaan alive?” 

“Yes, I am here,” said Hanumaan, and bowed low before Jaam¬ 
bavaan. 

“My son,” said the old Vaanara , “proceed northwards at once, 
across the sea to the Himaalaya range. Between the Rishabha and 
Kailaasa peaks, there is the Hill of Herbs. In that hill-top are four 
medicinal plants. If you bring them here quickly, Raama and Lak- 
shmana and the Vaanara army will recover consciousness. Their 
wounds will be healed and they will fight again. Do this without loss 
of time. Only you can do this.” 

Accordingly, Hanumaan sprang up into the air and moved fast. 
He reached the hill described by the venerable Jaambavaan and as 
he could not identify the plants, he carried the whole hill and returned 
with it to Lanka. 

Even with the approach of the Sanjeevi hill, Raama and Lak- 
shmana and the Vaanaras felt the darts slip off their bodies. Their 
wounds healed and they became strong and stood up. 



284 


RAAMA A Y A N A 


The battle was resumed. Taking counsel with Raama, Sugreeva 
now chose a few Vaanaras and ordered them to enter Lanka and set 
fire to the city. 

Towards midnight they entered the city with torches. They 
attacked and overpowered the sentry and set fire to the palaces and 
turrets of Lanka. Houses in their thousands were reduced to ashes. 
The proud city was reduced to a mass of ruin. 

Vaalmeeki describes this incident in detail. It reads very much 
like the destruction of cities in modern battles with which we are now 
familiar. 

Seeing Lanka being burnt down by the Vaanaras , Raavana was 
furious and sent to the battlefield Kumbha and Nikumbha, the sons 
of Kumbhakarna, together with Yoopaaksha and other Raakshasa 
warriors. 

After another terrible battle, Kumbha was slain by Sugreeva 
and Nikumbha by Hanumaan. Makaraaksha, son of Khara, who 
opposed Raama, fell to his fiery arrows. Many more mighty Raak - 
shasas perished. Then, at the bidding of Raavana, Indrajit went 
once again to the battle. He rose into the sky and became invisible. 
Thus be fought again unseen by the Vaanaras . Indrajit, by his necro¬ 
mancy, created a maaya -Seeta and, putting her in a cahriot, took 
her before the Vaanara army and seemingly killed her in their presence. 

Deceived and horrified by this, the Vaanaras asked themselves: 
“What good is it now to continue this war?” They left the field 
and went to Raama with the heart-rending news. 

As a result of this trick, Indrajit gained time to perform an 
aasuric sacrifice. Raama and Lakshmana, like the Vaanara warriors, 
believed that Seeta was dead and were lost in grief. They were 
completely bewildered and helpless when Vibheeshana came and en¬ 
quired what had happened. 

He listened to their story. Then he said: 

“You have been deceived. Never would Raavana allow Seeta 
to be killed. This is only a trick of sorcery, Indrajit tries to defeat 
you through magic. Having given up all hope of achieving success 
by normal means, he has gone to perform an aasuric sacrifice of 
great power. If he completes it, we cannot vanquish him. We should 
therefore go and obstruct the sacrifice. Let Lakshmana go at once 
and mar Indrajit’s purpose.” 

Accepting this advice, Raama sent Lakshmana who was accom¬ 
panied by Hanumaan and other Vaanaras , besides Vibheeshana, 
They went to the spot where Indrajit was about to offer oblations to 
evil spirits. The sacrifice was interrupted and a long and fierce 
battle ensued. Ascending his chariot, the son of Raavana sent forth 



THE DEATH OF INDRAJIT 


285 


his arrows. Standing on Hanumaan, Lakshmana did the same. 
As they were well matched in strength and skill, the battle lasted long. 
The chariot of Indrajit was destroyed in the course of the combat 
and both the heroes stood on the ground and continued the battle. 

At last, Lakshmana used the Indra-astra spell and uttering 
the name of Raama discharged the fatal arrow. The head of Indrajit 
was severed and fell to the ground and as it fell, it shone like fire. 
The Devas and Gandharvas showered flowers from the heavens. 

Lakshmana then went to Raama. He was wounded all over 
and bleeding. He walked slowly, supported by Jaambavaan and 
Hanumaan. Raama had already heard the news of the death of 
Indrajit. 

“Lakshmana!” he cried: “This is the end of the Raakshasa 
race. You have achieved it.” 

Lakshmana modestly stood back but Raama seated him on his 
lap, kissed his head and gave vent to his joy. 

“You have performed a mighty deed, impossible for anyone 
else. You have deprived Raavana of his right hand. Who in the 
world can equal you or Vibheeshana or Hanumaan? I have no more 
care. You have vanquished the conqueror of Indra. I feel I have 
already recovered Seeta.” 

The news reached Raavana that Indrajit had been slain by 
Lakshmana. When he heard that Vibheeshana helped Lakshmana 
in slaying Indrajit, his grief and anger swelled and the tears he shed 
burnt where they fell. And from his mouth issued fire. 

“Alas, my son! O peerless warrior! O hero! Vanquisher of 
the great Indra! Has Death won after all? Have you entered the 
heaven of heroes? But I should not grieve,” he said. 

But the father’s heart would not thus be denied, and again he 
cried: “What! Is Indrajit gone? The world is now empty for 
me. Oh son, you have left your mother Mandodari and your dear 
wife and myself heart-broken and disconsolate. Nothing remains 
to us now but revenge and despair. 

“It is best to kill Seeta, the cause of all this tragedy. My son 
killed the maaya- Seeta. Now I shall kill the real Seeta herself.” 
So saying he rushed out, sword in hand, intending to do it. 

Some fierce Raakshasas , seeing Raavana issuing out in anger, 
applauded him with joy; but the minister Supaarsva was horrified 
and appealed to Raavana’s better sense and what was due to himself 
as a man and a king. 

“King!” he cried, “how dare you think such a thought? How 
can you do it? Oh, Lord of ten-heads! Brother of Kubera! Are 
you thinking to kill a woman? Are you going to incur this shame 



raamaayaka 


286 

and sin? Can you thus be tempted by anger? You have mastered 
the Vedas and all the sciences. You have performed many penances. 
How can you end up with such a thing as this? Who is equal to you? 
Let us direct our anger against Raama. It will be new moon tomorrow. 
Gather all your armies, issue out of Lanka, slay Raama and 
Lakshmana and achieve victory. Then take Seeta. Put on the 
armour you have secured from Brahma. Ascend your chariot and 
go to battle.” 

Raavana felt that Supaarsva was right and his words were good. 
Seated on his throne, he was silent for a while, lost in profound 
meditation. Then he addressed the commanders with folded hands, 
saying: 

“Go now with all your strength and slay Raama. If even you 
fail, 1 shall go myself and destroy him.” 

Never before had he been so courteous and humble when dealing 
with his officers. Adversity had taught him this lesson. Mounted 
on chariots that shone like the hills on the evening horizon and on 
the back of great elephants and beautiful horses, Raavana’s army 
went in full force for the great battle. 

The Vaanaras tore up rocks and trees and attacked the Raakshasas 
fiercely. The Raakshasas returned the attack with equally grim 
ferocity. 

The Vaanaras jumped about everywhere and worked havoc 
among the Raakshasas , their chariots and animals. Each of the 
Raakshasas was surrounded by many Vaanaras and slain. 

The Raakshasas too did not spare the Vaanaras whom they 
killed in tens of thousands. 

Raama bent his bow and sent showers of arrows against the 
Raakshasas who destroyed their army like a raging fire. Warriors 
only saw their companions fail. They could not see Raama because 
of the shower of arrows. Their fear conjured up a multitude of 
Raamas, who dealt death in all directions. 

Countless elephants and horses perished. Thousands of chariots 
were broken. The Raakshasa army was destroyed, all but a handful 
who fled into Lanka. 

The Devas, Gandharvas and Siddhas sang the praise of Raama 
from above. In Lanka, the Raakshasa women clung to one another 
and lamented loudly that Raavana’s folly should have brought this 
great calamity on them. 



CHAPTER LXXIV 


END OF RAAVANA 

There was wailing in every house in Lanka. In Raavana’s breast 
grief, shame and anger seethed like a raging sea. He had so far 
sent his commanders and men in detachments, and brave as they 
were, they had been destroyed in detail. This had been the result 
of overweening confidence in his invincibility and contempt for the 
enemy, most of whom fought with no better weapons than sticks 
and stones; but repeated reverses had brought him no wisdom. He 
had not even disputed the passage of the sea but allowed the enemy 
a lodgment in his island. But negligent and reckless as a general, 
he was brave and finally resolving to fight himself and with his sole 
strength to destroy the foe, he set out. He had full faith in his prowess 
and in the efficacy of the boons he had secured and he went forth 
with confidence mounted on his divine chariot which was drawn 
by eight horses and filled with all manner of weapons accompanied 
by a dvision of Raakshasa chariot-warriors. f 

As Raavana issued out of Lanka, the sun seemed obscured by 
an unpredicted eclipse, and foul brids and beasts of the night roared 
at large with weird ill-omened cries; but disregarding it afl, Raavana 
drove out to battle accompanied by Viroopaaksha, Mahodara and 
Mahaapaarsva. 

The mighty Raakshasa warriors who followed Raavana were 
mown down by a deadly flight of arrows and chunks of rocks and 
presently Raavana found himself facing Lakshmana, who tried to 
oppose his further progress. Forcing hiS way past Lakshmana, 
Raavana precipitated himself against Raama with all the pent-up 
fury of hatred and revenge and strove to overwhelm him with a spate 
of arrows. 

Raama easily baffled these arrows with his own and struck 
Raavana repeatedly, without however being able to penetrate his 
armour. Thus they fought, these supreme bowmen, each bent on 
slaying the other and using increasingly potent missiles of secret 
power, while the gods in heaven looked on with marvel and admiration. 
Neither hero had met such another opponent before and on both 
sides admiration was mingled with wrath. 

Raama pierced with his darts every limb of Raavana. And 
yet he did not fall. 

Then Lakshmana and Vibheeshana together attacked Raavana. 
Furious with his brother and determined to kill him, Raavana flung 
at him a powerful weapon; but intercepted by a dart of Lakshmana, 



288 


RAAMAAYANA 


it broke in two and fell on the ground like a burning brand. Once 
again, Raavana aimed another mighty sakti against Vibheeshana, 
This too Lakshmana intercepted. Then Raavana hurled a sakti 
at Lakshmana crying, “Now you are dead!” 

Under its impact, Lakshmana fell down unconscious on the 
ground. 

Not observing this, Raama went on keeping up his pressure 
against Raavana. While the battle raged between the two, the 
Vaanara leaders took counsel and sent Hanumaan once again to the 
Hill of Herbs to save the life of Lakshmana. 

For the second time, Hanumaan flew northwards and, not wasting 
time searching for the plants, returned with the whole mountain. 
Lakshmana got well again and resumed his part in the battle. 

Meanwhile, Maatali brought his master Indra’s chariot to the 
battlefield for the use of Raama. 

“Indra, king of gods, has sent this for your use,” said Maatali. 
“Be pleased to ascend this chariot and destroy Raavana, the enemy 
of the gods!” 

* Raama bowed to the gods, circumambulated the divine chariot 
and ascended it. Then followed a wonderful battle. 

Sorely wounded, Raavana fell unconscious and noting this, 
his charioteer quietly took him out of the battlefield. 

When, a little later, Raavana recovered consciousness, he was 
highly wroth with his charioteer for taking him out of the battle¬ 
field and insisted on being taken back to face Raama. The grim battle 
began again. Every astra was met by another. In new and wonderful 
ways, the two chariots moved and the two warriors fought for a long 
time, while both armies watched the spectacle with breathless admira¬ 
tion and anxiety. 

Maatali, the charioteer, whispered into Raama’s ear: “The 
Raakshasa's end is approaching. Delay no further. May I remind 
you of Brahma-astral" 

Raama uttered the spell and sent the Brahma-astra . Though 
the Raakshasa's ten heads had often been cut off before, they had 
grown again and baffled Raama. The Brahma-astra , emitting flames, 
went towards Raavana and pierced his chest, where was enshrined 
the secret of his invincibility, and shattered it. 

Then the bow slipped from the Raakshasa's hand and he fell 
down from the chariot and lay stretched on the battlefield. 

The gods blew their trumpets. Raama and his chariot were 
covered by a heap of flowers showered from the heavens. Laksh¬ 
mana, Vibheeshana, Jaambavaan and other warriors surrounded 
Raama, lost in joy and adoration. 



END OF RAAVANA 


2S9 


When the first flush of triumph was over and Vibheeshana looked 
at his brother’s body, the natural call of blood and memories of 
boyhood days when Raavana and he had loved and played quite 
overwhelmed him and he burst into lamentations over his lost brother. 

“O warrior!” he cried. “O brother of heroic deeds! O scholar 
learned in all Shaastrasl O valiant and famous King of kings! Your 
great arms are now sprawling helpless on the ground! Self-willed 
and self-deceived, surrounded by bad advisers, you would not heed 
my warning! The worst I feared has happened now! You reaped 
what you sowed and you lie on the bare ground, O once mighty ruler 
of the Raakshasasl ” 

To Vibheeshana thus lamenting, Raama spoke: 

“Raavana fought like a true warrior and fell fighting like a hero! 
Death had washed his sins. It calls for no mourning. Raavana 
has entered Heaven.” 

Raama cleared all confusion from Vibheeshana’s mind and 
bade him do the funeral rites for his departed brother. 

Said Raama: “It is for you now, his brother, to do the rites. 
Death ends all enmity. I, his former foe, even I can rightly perform 
his obsequies. Your brother is my brother too, is he not?” 

The women of Raavana’s palace came to the field to mourn. 
They led the queen Mandodari, who looked like the goddess of 
Grief incarnate. The crowned Queen and beloved wife of Raavana 
was in utter desolation. 

“Indra, King of gods, dared not face your anger,” she cried. 
“The rishis and the Gandharvas at the very sight of you fled in fear 
in all directions. And now a mere man, a wanderer in the forest, 
has brought you down! I do not understand how this could have 
happened. Truly, Fate is all-powerful! But lord, my lord, I warned 
you long ago. Did I not tell you that this Raama is no mere human 
being, but someone greater than Indra or Agni or Yama, whom you 
could not vanquish. This Raama is no other than Vishnu Himself 
in human form, God without beginning, middle or end. Even when 
we heard that he stood on the ground riding no car and slew your 
brother Khara in Janasthaana, did I not say this? When Hanumaan 
penetrated Lanka, the impenetrable fortress, and laid it waste, I 
knew the truth. I begged you not to incur their enmity but you would 
not listen. 

“Why did you cast lustful eyes on chaste Seeta? This was the 
madness that drove you to your death! Was it not a heinous sin 
to carry her off when she was alone? Death in the form of Seeta 
drew you to your end! Seeta and Raama are now re-united and 
happy after their brief separation, but me and all our race you have 



290 


RAAMAAYANA 


thrust for ever into the depths of sorrow. Alas, my husband, my 
lover! You lie dead. Yet how beautiful you look with your body 
pierced by Raama’s darts, covered with the blood and dust of battle! 

“What should 1 do now? 1 had a lord who was the Lord of 
Lanka! I had a son who had vanquished Indra. They have left 
me and I am a mere helpless widow without friends or home!” 

Lamenting thus, Mandodari fell on Raavana’s body and lay 
unconscious. 


CHAPTER LXXV 

THE END 

Vibheeshana was crowned King of Lanka in a magnificent cere¬ 
mony. The new Lord of Lanka came out to the Vaanara camp 
and bowed low before Raama. 

Then Raama said to Hanumaan: “With the King’s permission, 
enter Lanka and tell Seeta what has happened.” Hanumaan accord¬ 
ingly took permission from Vibheeshana and went to Asoka Vana 
to convey the news to Seeta. 

Seeta’s joy was beyond words. She was silent. 

“Why, mother,” asked Hanumaan, “why do you not speak?” 

“What is there to say, my son?” she answered. “How can I 
repay my debt to you? Your wisdom, your valour, your prowess, 
your patience, your humility are all your own. None in the world 
can equal you.” As she said this, her eyes filled with tears of gratitude 
and affection. 

Hanumaan looked at the Raakshasi women who had guarded 
Seeta and turning to Seeta said: “I wish to slay these cruel women 
who troubled you. Do give me leave!” 

“No, my son,” she answered. “Who in the world is blame¬ 
less? It is the part of noble souls to be compassionate towards all— 
sinners as well as good people.” 

These words of Seeta are treasured like nectar by generations 
of pious men. The worst of sinners, clinging to the golden feet of 
the Mother, can gain forgiveness* 

“These Raakshasis” she continued, “but carried out their master’s 
orders. How are they to blame? Their king is dead and has paid 
for his crime. It is unjust to punish these Raakshasis now.” 

All that Hanumaan could find to say in reverent admiration was 
that what she said was only what was worthy of Raama’s wife* 

“What message am I to carry to Raama?” he asked. 



THE END 


291 


“I am eager to be in his presence,” she answered. 4 ‘Hiat is all. 0 

Hanumaan returned to Raama and gave an account of his visit. 
For some reason Raama’s face now darkened and with lack-lustre 
eyes he fell into a brown study. A little later he turned to Vibheeshana 
and said: 

“Ask Seeta to bathe and bedeck herself and bring her here.” 

When the message reached Seeta in the Asoka Vana, she said: 
“I would rather go as I am.” 

“Not so, my lady,” said Vibheeshana, “the Prince’s orders 
should be obeyed.” 

So, after a bath and bedecked with jewels and seated in a palan- 
quin, Seeta went to the camp. 

When he heard that Seeta was coming, Raama woke up from 
his meditation. Events of the past rose like waves and battering 
against his mincf threw it into a wild commotion of shame, grief and 
joy. 

As Seeta’s palanquin was taken through the great concourse of 
Vaanaras , they thronged round the princess and caused confusion. 
It was made worse by the Vaanara leaders trying to push them aside 
and make way for the palanquin. 

“Let no one be kept away,” said Raama. “These dear Vaanaras 
have stood and suffered for me. Seeta will be pleased to see me 
surrounded by such friends. Let no one be pushed away.” 

* Raama’s face showed a strange transformation of mind. None 
of those around him, not even Lakshmana, could understand. 

Alighting from the palanquin, Seeta, with downcast eyes, pro¬ 
ceeded towards Raama. “ Aaaryaputra," she said and sobbed, unable 
to speak more. 

A&ryaputra in Sanskrit means beloved and noble one and is an 
intimate form of address of wife to husband. 

U I have slain the enemy,” said Raama. “I have recovered you. 
I have done my duty as a Kshatriya. My vow is now fulfilled.” 

Incomprehensible and wholly unexpected were these words that 
he uttered. His face darkened for some reason. Then he spoke even 
harsher words. 

“It was not for mere attachment to you that I waged this grim 
battle but in the discharge of duty as a Kashtriya. It gives me no 
joy now to get you back, for dubiety envelopes you like a dark cloud 
of smoke.” 

“What do you wish to do now?” he continued, “You must live 
alone, for we cannot live together. You can stay under the protection 
of any of our kinsmen or friends. How can a kshatriya take back a 
wife who has lived so long in a stranger’s house?” 



292 


RAAMAAYANA 


Secta looked at Raama. Her eyes flashed fire. 

“Unworthy words have you spoken!” she said. “My ears have 
heard them and my heart is broken. The uncultured may speak 
such words but not one nobly bom and brought up like you. Your 
anger, it seems, has destroyed your understanding. My lord does not 
remember the family from which I come. Janaka, the great seer, 
was my father and he brought me up. Is it my fault that the wicked 
Raakshasa seized me by force and imprisoned me? But since this is 
how you look at it, there is but one course open to me.” 

Then turning to Lakshmana, ‘Fetch the faggots, Lakshmana, and 
kindle a fire,” she said. 

Lakshmana, who had been watching Raama’s behaviour in dismay 
and indignation turned to look at Raama’s face seeking his orders 
but Raama did not say “No” to Seeta’s request nor show any sign of 
softening. 

Obeying Seeta, Lakshmana kindled a big fire and the princess, 
with eyes fixed on the ground, circumambulated her lord and exclaimed: 

“Ye Gods, I bow before you. Oh rishis, I bow to you. Oh 
Agni, you at least know my purity and will take me as your own!” 

With these words she jumped into the flames. And wonder of 
wonders! the lambent flames were crowded with celestial figures, for 
all the gods came and assembled there; and Brahma spoke: 

“Naaraayana! Mighty God that took human form to slay Raa- 
vana! Is not this your own Lakshmi?” 

Agni, God of fire, rose in his own body out of the flames and 
lifting Seeta in his arms with all her clothes and jewels untouched and 
intact, presented her to Raama. 

Raama said to Brahma: “Who am I? All that I know and can 
tell is that I am Raama, son of Dasaratha. You know who I am and 
whence I came and more; it is you who must inform me.” -, 

Saying this to Brahma, Raama accepted Seeta fire-proved. 

“Think you that I did not know your irreproachable purity ? 
This ordeal was to satisfy the people. Without it, they would say— 
would they not?—that Raama, blinded by love, behaved with a strange 
weakness and broke the rule of well-brought-up men.” 

So saying he drew her to his side. 

Then Dasaratha descended from above and placing the Prince 
on his lap, blessed him. 

“My child!” he said to Seeta. “Forgive my son. Forgive him 
for the wrong he did you to preserve the dharma of the world. God 
bless you!” 

Indra gave his boon, and the Vamaras who died in battle for 
Raama regained their lives. 



THE END 


393 


Raama and Seeta now re-united, ascended the Pushpaka which 
carried them swiftly in the air with their friends, the Vaanara warriors 
and Vibheeshana, to Ayodhya. 

As they travelled in the sky, “Look there!” he said, “that is the 
causeway built by Nala.” Again, “Look there, that is Kishkindha,” 
he said, “where I met and made friends with Hanumaan and Sugreeva.” 
And Raama pointed out to Seeta the spots where he and Lakshmana 
had wandered disconsolate and related to her all his unforgettable 
experiences. 

Alighting at Bharadvaaja’s aashrama , they sent word in advance 
to Guha and Bharata. 

The city of Ayodhya swam in a sea of joy. Raama and Bharata 
met. Planning for Bharata’s sake, ambitious Kaikeyi and her hunch¬ 
back maid had contrived and concocted plots. But now, as Bharata 
bowed at the feet of Raama, a joy deeper than what they had planned 
for him was his. What kingly crown could equal the joy one found 
at Raama’s feet? What sovereignty could bring one the glory that 
was now Bharata’s for ever? 

The Vaishnava hymns exalt Bharata even above Raama for a 
spotless mind and unblemished unselfishness. For fourteen years 
till the return of Raama, Bharata installed Raama’s paadukas and ad¬ 
ministered the kingdom as a devotional exercise in the service of his 
brother. 

Now that Raama was crowned King as his father had wished, 
Bharata’s penance was at an end and his heart was filled with joy. 

Of Hanumaan, need anything be said? Receiving from Raama 
a pearl necklace, Seeta put it round Hanumaan’s neck. He saw the 
smile of divine grace brighteinng her face as she did so. What more 
could Hanumaan desire? 

I have re-told in brief compass the story of the Prince of Ayodhya 
as sung by Vaalmeeki. Those who read or listen to the tale, it is said, 
will be saved from sin and sorrow. 

Sri Sankara, the master of wisdom, has said that, if one keeps in 
one’s heart the son of Dasaratha and meditates on him with reverence, 
one’s sins wilj all be burnt up as chaff in a fire. 

After the avataar of Raama, the lord appeared again among men 
with greater soulabhya (easy accessibility) as Govinda. He lived 
among shepherds as one of them and served Arjuna as a chariot 
driver. 

At the end of the Gita y the Lord says to Aijuna: 

“Believe in Me as sole refuge, cast aside all doubt and come unto 
Me. I shall save you from all sins. This is truth, friend. Cast off 
your fear.” 



294 


RAAMAAYANA 


This'promisc of Sri Krishna is addressed to all of us. We, like 
Arjuna, have our doubts and fears in the Kurukshetra of life and this 
assurance of grace is for all of us, for we are all dear to Him. 


EPILOGUE 

On one occasion Gandhiji and I were talking about a girl very 
dear to both of us. 1 said: “How did she get all these ideas and 
phrases of love without having read any of present day love stories!” 

Gandhiji said in answer: “But has she not read the Raamaa - 
yanal Is the Raamaayana not a love story too?” This struck me as 
profound. Then we turned to other matters. 

Dasaratha’s troubles began with love Then the love of Raama 
and Seeta is the theme and substance of Ayodhyaakaanda . 

In love that is not opposed to dharma , we find a manifest tion 
of God. So was it affirmed by Sri Krishna when he explained his 
manifold being to Arjuna. The Raamaayana has, for its twin theme, 
love that is opposed to dharma also. The Raamaayana is undoubtedly 
a great love story. 

Those who regard the Raamaayana as an allegory interpret Seeta 
as the individual soul and Raama as the Supreme Being. God seeks 
and pursues the human soul till He secures it. He is eager to save us; 
it is enough if we just do not obstruct or resist. 

There are also other interpretations and applications of the 
Raamaayana. Seeta, the female counterpart of the Supreme Being, is 
the embodiment of compassion and grace. Compassion is the Supreme 
Mother and she is enthroned in the heart of the Lord. When she 
casts her merciful glance on us, we reach the feet of God. Paarvati’s 
function in relation to Siva and Lakshmi’s in relation to Hari are both 
indentical, and are just variations of the same creed of dependence 
on God’s grace. God as Father and God as Mother are not distinct. 
If the Lord were to be parted from cpmpassion, our plight would be 
just that of Raavana who separated Seeta from Raama. 

The quality of the Lord’s commission can be understood from 
the experience of true human love. 

Many meanings can be read in the Raamaayana and its beauty 
appreciated in many ways as from a real diamond many glorious 
colours eanate. Seventeen months ago I began writing these weekly 
chapters not without fear and trembling. This week f close it full of 
thankfulness for the health of body and peace of mind which enabled 
me to complete this humble service. Learned men will no doubt 



EPILOGUE 


295 


find many faults in what I have written. But they must be glad also 
that ij has done some good. 

A word to the children who read these chapters. I have told 
the story of the Prince of Ayodhya mainly for your sake. Grown-up 
people may read Vaaimeeki and Kamban. Those who know to sing 
can render with joy the sweet songs on Raama given to us by Tyaa- 
garaaja. But this story that 1 have told can be read direct by you, 
children, without anyone’s help. 

You should look upon Raama, Lakshmana and Hanumaan like 
your own fathers and elder brothers who are by your side ever eager 
to help you. Grow to be like Bharata, Lakshmana and Hanumaan, 
good and brave souls, full of love and strength. 

Mothers too, I know, have been reading this story with joy. 
This has been a great enouragement to me. They can understand 
why 1 have told the story in simple words and short sentences for the 
sake of our children. Everything we do, we do for the sake of our 
children, do we not? Only women can realise and re-live the ex¬ 
periences and feelings of Seeta. The story of Seeta as told by Vaai¬ 
meeki and Kamban can be fully appreciated only by women. Only 
they can fully appreciate the courage of Jataayu and the prowess 
of Hanumaan. Seeta’s sorrows have not ended with the Raarnaa - 
yana . They go on, still, in the lives of our women. 

In the Raama avataar , Raama did not know that he was God 
incarnate. Krishna knew that he was an avataar and acted accord¬ 
ingly. We should read the two stories with this difference in mind. 
The despair and grief that the man Raama experienced, Krishna never 
knew. When he sucked at the demon-woman’s breast or was bound 
with a rope and thrashed for mischief,, he cared not nor grieved. 
Standing weaponless in the battlefield, he led the warrior to destroy 
the wicked. In every episode of Krishna we see the difference bet¬ 
ween the two avataars . 

I have followed the story of the Prince of Ayodhya as told by 
Vaaimeeki. There was a legend current among people, I think even 
before Vaalmeeki’s time, that after recovering Seeta, for fear of scan¬ 
dal, Raama sent her away to live in the forest. 

This pathetic episode must have sprung from the sorrow-laden 
imagination of our women. It has taken shape as the Uttarakaanda 
of Raamaayana . Although there is beauty in the Uttarakaanda , I 
must say my heart rebels against it. Vaaimeeki had disposed of this 
old legend through the fire ordeal in the battlefield. Even that ordeal 
does not seem to me as consistent with Raama’s character. It is 
painful to read it. 

As the Prince returned from Mithila he met Parasuraama. I 



296 


RAAMAAYANA 


have heard it said that with that meeting Parasuraama’s avataar came 
to an end. Likewise, it should be held, I think, that Raama’s avataar 
came to end with the slaying of Raavana. After that battle, Raama 
remained only as a king of the Ikshvaaku race. 

On this theory, Raama’s treatment of Seeta after the battle and 
in the Uttarakaanda can be explained simply as the behaviour of a 
king in accordance with the customs of the times. 

But, how can we comment on a work composed thousands of 
years ago and coming down to us in palm-leaf manuscripts subject 
to corruption? If, even after the fire-ordeal in the Yuddhakaanda , 
it is said in the Uttarakaanda that Seeta was sent to the forest, we may 
take it that it mirrors the voiceless and endless suffering of our women¬ 
folk. Sorrow and joy are both alike the play of God. God himself 
took with him his divine spouse, the embodiment of his own supreme 
compassion, into the world of men and women, and enacted with her 
a great drama of joy and sorrow in the Raamaayana . 

Rain falling from the heavens flows into the rivers and flows down 
to join the sea. Again from the sea the water is sucked up by the 
sun and rises to the sky, whence it descends again as rain and flows 
down as rivers. Even so, feelings and values rise from the people 
and, touching the poet’s heart, are transformed into a poem which, 
in turn, enlighten and inspire the people. Thus in every land the 
poets and their people continuously reinforce each other. The 
tenderness and purity and the untold sufferings of women took shape 
as the Uttara Raamaayana . Like an unflickering lamp, it throws 
light on the quality of their hearts. Whether the epics and songs of a 
nation spring from the faith and ideas of the common folk, or whether 
a nation’s faith and ideas are produced by its literature is a question 
which one is free to answer as one likes. Does a plant spring from 
the seed or does a seed issue from the plant? Was the bird of the egg 
the first cause? Did clouds rise from the sea or was the sea filled by 
the waters from the sky? All such inquiries take us to the feet of God 
transcending speech and thought. 

One other point. In describing how Raavana carried off Seeta, 
Kamban differs from Vaalmeeki. In Kamban’s Raamaayana , 
Raavana does not seize and carry Seeta as Vaalmeeki describes; 
without touching her he lifts her with the earth on which she stands. 
Kamban’s version ts followed by most popular expositors because 
this version is less painful to our feelings. 

It is no sin or shame to an innocent woman if a villain behaves 
like a brute. Yet, mistakenly, we in this country look on the violence 
of a brute as causing a blemish to the woman’s purity* It is in defer- 



ence to this wrong feeling that Kamban departed from Vaalmeeki 
here. 

For the same reason, Tulasi relates that Seeta seized and 
carried off by Raavana was not the real Seeta at all but a palpable image 
of hers left behind by the real Seeta. Thus the story is told in all 
North India. During the fire ordeal, it is the maaya -Seeta that dis¬ 
appears and the real Seeta springs again and returns from the flames. 

It was perhaps presumptuous on my part to have begun the task, 
but it was a joy to re-tell the Raamaayana. Now, when it is over, I 
feel like one awaking from a dream of joy. When the Prince left the 
city, he felt no sorrow; it was only when he lost Seeta that he knew 
grief. So with me too. When I had to step down from high office 
and heavy responsibility, I did not feel at a loss or wonder what to do 
next. But now, when I have come to the end of the tale of the Prince 
of Ayodhya, the void is like that of a shrine without a God. 

Let no one look upon work as a burden. Good work is the 
secret that keeps life going. While one should not hanker after 
results, life without work would be unendurable. 



GLOSSARY 


Aadisesha .The primordial Serpent which is Lord 

Vishnu’s bed. 

Aagneyaastra .. .. A missile charged with an invocation to 

the God Agni (Fire). 

Aaryaputra .. .. .. ‘Noble prince’. Classical form of ad¬ 

dress by wife of husband, betoken¬ 
ing love and respect combined. 

Aashrama .Hermitage. 

Aasuric Yagna .. .. Sacrifice pertaining to Asuras. Demo¬ 

niacal sacrifice and necromancy for 
gaining power. 

Abhisheka .Religious rite of pouring or sprinkling 

sacred waters on the head of one 
who is installed as King or First 
Prince. 

Adharma .Sin, unrighteous action, opposite of 

dharma. 

Agni .The God of Fire. 

Alakaapuri .. .. .. The Capital of Kubera, the God of 

Wealth. 

Amaraavati .. .. The city in heaven where Indra has 

his abode. 

Aruna .The God of Dawn, First son of Kasya- 

pa Prajaapati and Vinata. He was 
born lame. Aruna was the elder 
brother of Garuda. Aruna is the 
Charioteer of the Sun God. 

Arundhati .Wife of Sage Vasishtha, a pattern of 

chastity. • 

Astras .Miraculous weapons whose power lay 

in the invocations whith wich they 

were charged. 

Asuras .Enemies of the Gods. 

Aswapati .King of Kekaya, father of Kaikeyi and 

grandfather of Bharata! 

Aswini Devatas .. .. Celestial beings, twin sons of Soorya. 

Avataar .. .. .. Incarnation. 

Bala, AtiBala . . .. Two invocations to obviate hunger, 

thirst and sleep. 

Bhaageerathi .. .. Another name of Ganga. 

Bhaagyam .Fortune, prosperity. 





GLOSSARY 


299 


Bhakta 

Bhakti 

Bheda 

Bhogavati 

Braahmana 


Brahma 
Brahmaastra .. 

Brahmachaari 


Brahmadanda 

Brahmajnaana 

Brahmarishi . 
Brihaspati 

Chaitra 

Chandaala 

Daana 

Daanavaas . 

Daityas 

Daivam 

Danda 

Darbha 

Deva-Loka . 

Devartshis 

Devos 

Dharma 

Dlshtom 


.. Devotee. 

.. Devotion to God, loyalty, faith. 

.. Diplomacy of playing one against an¬ 
other in the enemy camp. 

.. The capital of the Serpent King in the 
nether world. 

.. The first of the four castes devoting 
their lives to study and teaching and 
the performance of religious cere¬ 
monies. 

.. The Creator, one of the Trinity. 

.. The most powerful among Astras . 
See Astra . 

.. One who is in the first of the four 
stages in a Brahmin’s life, the stage 
of study and practice of a disciplined 
life. 

.. Holy staff of an austere Brahmin. 

.. The realisation of the Supreme Being, 
higher wisdom. 

.. The highest type of sages. 

.. The preceptor of the Devas, the planet 
Jupiter. 

.. The month of Chaitra, the second half 
of April and the first half of May. 

. . Outcaste, untouchable. 

.. Gift, bribing off the enemy. 

.. Sons of Danu and Kasyapa Prajaapati, 
enemies of Devas. 

.. Sons of Diti and Kasyapa Prajaapati, 
enemies of Devas. 

.. Divine, celestial, fate. 

.. Physical punishment, force used in 
meeting the enemy’s tactics. 

.. A species of sacred grass used for re¬ 
ligious rites. 

.. The Celestial Regions. 

.. Sages of Heaven. 

.. Celestial Beings, sons of Aditi and Ka¬ 
syapa. 

.. Duty as laid down by religion or cus¬ 
tom. 

.. Indicated, 








300 


RAAMAAYANA 


Candharvas 

Garuda 
Govinda 
Guru .. 
Had .. 


Himavaan 

Ikshvaaku 

Indra 

Indra-Astra 

Jaambavaan 

Jamadagni .. 
Jnaana 
Jnaani s 
Kaama 

Kaamadhenu .. 


Kaamavalli .. 
Kaartaveeryaarjuna .. 


Kailaasa 

Kalpaka 


A class of semi-divine beings. Celes¬ 
tial musicians. 

The bird king who is Vishnu’s vehicle. 

One of the names of Krishna. 

Aacharya , preceptor. 

One of the names of Vishnu. The 
second of the Hindu Trinity. Other 
names are Krishna, Mukunda, Maa- 
dhava, Kesava. Naaraayana. 

The presiding deity of the Himalaya 
range. 

King of the Solar race from whom the 
name came for the race of Solar kings. 

The chief and the king of the gods. 

Missile charged with an invocation to 
Indra. 

Leader of bears in the army of Su- 
greeva. 

A great sage, father of Parasuraama. 

Spiritual knowledge, realisation. 

A knower of Reality. 

Desire, usually referred to in relation 
to sex. 

The Divine cow of Heaven. It was 
born of the Ocean when the Devas 
and Asuras churned it for Nectar. 

A name which Soorpanakha gave to 
herself. 

Son of King Kritaveerya. He had a 
thousand hands and his golden 
chariot could go wherever he wish¬ 
ed. He was a contemporary of 
Raavana and had him imprisoned in 
his city. He was killed by Parasuraa¬ 
ma for carrying away Kaamadhenu 
and killing Jamadagni. 

The abode of Siva. 

A tree which issued out of the Ocean 
when it was churned by Devas and 
Asuras. A celestial tree which 
grants any wish to people who ate 
under it. 



GLOSSARY * 


m 


Karma 


Karma Yogin 
Kasyapa 


Kekaya 


Kinkaras 

Kinnaras 

Kodanda 

Kokila 

Krodha 

Krouncha 

Kshatriya 

Kubera 

Kurukshetra .. 
Kusa 
Lakshmi 
Leela 

Maalyavaan 
Maalyavati .. 
Maaruti 
Mahaabali .. 


Mahaadeva .. 
Maharshi 
Manmatha .. 


Action, the law that governs all action 
and its inevitable consequences on 
the doer. 

.. One who practises the way of action 
for salvation. 

% .. A celebrated sage, son of Brahma. He 
% had many wives through whom 

were born the various forms of life 
on earth. 

A country north-west of Kosala, the 
place where Bharata’s maternal 
grandfather ruled. West of modern 
Punjab. 

.. Soldiers, personal attendants. 

Celestial beings like the Gandharvas, 
who played on musical instruments. 

Raama’s bow. 

The cuckoo. 

Anger. 

A bird. 

The second of the four castes. 

.. God of Wealth. 

The battle-field *where the Paandavas 
and Kauravas fought. 

A kind of grass used in religious cere¬ 
monies. 

The Goddess of wellbeing-*-wife of 
Vishnu. 

Play, the unexplainable ways of Pro¬ 
vidence. 

The aged Raakshasa grandfather of 
Raavana. 

.. A stream flowing by the foot of the 
Chitrakoota Hill. 

Name of Hanumaan being son of 
Marut, the Wind-god. 

An Asura who became a powerful ruler 
and a rival to the gods. He was the 
son of Virochana and grandson of 
Prahlaada. 

.. One of the names of Siva. 

.. A great sage. 

The God of Love. 






302 


HAAMAAYANA 


Mantras 
Maya 
Meru .. 

Naaga 

Naaraayana 

Naarada 

Namah 

Nandigraama 


Neeti Shaastra 
Nikumbhila .. 

Niyati 
Paaduka 
Paaraayana .. 

Paarijaata 

Paarvati 

Paataala 

Paayasam 

Parasuraama 


Pinaaka 

Pooja 

Prajaapati 

Puraanas 

Pushpaka Vimaana 


Raajagriha .. 
Raajasabha .. 
Raajasik 

Raakshasas 

Raakshasi 

Raghu 

Raja Rishi ,, 


Scriptural verses, incantations. 

The architect of Asuras. 

A fabulous mountain around which 
the Sun is supposed to revolve. 

Semi-divine serpents. 

Vishnu. 0 

The Celestial Rishi with the lute. 

Bow, salutation. 

A village near Ayodhya where Bharata 
lived and ruled Ayodhya as a de¬ 
puty of Raama. 

Science of government and diplomacy. 

A cave and grove in Lanka where 
oblations were offered to Kaali. 

Law. 

Footwear. 

Reading a Puraana or Epic as a daily 
devotional exercise. 

A celestial flowering tree. 

Uma, wife of Siva. 

The nether regibns. - 

A sweet preparation of milk and rice. 

The sixth incarnation of Vishnu who 
curbed the growing arrogance of the 
Kshatriyas. 

Bow of Siva. 

Worship. 

The Creator. 

Sacred legends. 

Aerial chariot of Raavana which ori¬ 
ginally belonged to Kubera. Sit¬ 
ting in this chariot, one could obtain 
anything he or she desired. 

The capital of the Kekaya country. 

Council of State. 

Appertaining to the principle of ac¬ 
tivity, egoism, arrogance. 

Evil-minded strong beings similar to 
Asuras. 

Feminine of Raakshasa . 

An ancestor of Raama. He was a 
king of the Solar race. 

An eminent sage, a philosopher-king. 









GLOSSARY 


303 


Rishabha 
Rishi .. 

Rudra 

Saama 

Shaastras 

Saatvik 


Sanyaasini 

Sarama 


Sarayu 

Satyaparaakrama 

Siddha 


Siva .. 

Sloka 
Soorya 
Soulabhya 
Sri Krishna .. 

Sruti 

Sukra 

Swarga 

Taamasik 

Tamasaa 

Tapas 

Tapasvi 

Tapasvini 

Tapasya 

Tilaka 

Trivikrama .. 


A peak in the Himalayas. 

A sage who has undergone severe aus¬ 
terities. 

Siva. 

Peaceful approach to the enemy, nego¬ 
tiation. 

Sacred lore. • 

Appertaining to the clement of equa¬ 
nimity as distinguished from the 
principles of activity and inertia. 

A female recluse, feminine of SanyaasL 

Wife of Vibheeshana. She and 
Trijata were the friends among the 
Raakshasis that Seeta had during 
her incarceration in the Asoka 
Vana . 

A tributary of the river Ganges on the 
North bank. 

Righteous and strong. Strong in 
righteousness. 

One who has attained special powers 
through penance. A class of heaven¬ 
ly beings. 

One of the Hindu Trinity. 

Couplet or quatrain in Sanskrit. 

The Sun God. 

Easy of access. 

The eighth incarnation of Vishnu, who 
gave the Bhagvad Gita . 

Veda, Revelation. 

The guru or aachaarya of the Asuras, 
the planet Venus. 

Heaven, where the blessed are received 
after death. 

Pertaining to the element of inertia. 

A river flowing into Ganga. 

Austerities and penances. 

One who does Tapas or penance. 

Feminine of Tapasvi . 

Power obtained through Tapas or 
penance. 

A mark put on the forehead of women. 

See Vaamana. 




&AAMAAYANA 


m 

Vaamana 


Vaanaprastha 


Vaayu 

Vaidehi 

Vaishnava 

Vaitarani 
Vanina 
Veda .. 


Vidhi .. 

Vidyut-Jihva 

Vinata 
Vishnu 
Visravas 
Viswakarma .. 
Vritra 

Yaaga . .. 

Yajamaana 

Yaksha 
Yama .. 

Yojana 

Yudhaajit 

Yuvaraaja 


The fifth incarnation of Vishnu to curb 
the power of Mahaabali. Vaamana 
became Trivikrama of huge stature 
who measured Earth and Heaven in 
two steps. 

The third stage of a Brahmin’s life, 
retiring with his wife as a prepara¬ 
tion for sanyaasa. 

The Wind God who was father of 
Hanumaan. 

Another name of Seeta. 

Appertaining to Vishnu or worship of 
Vishnu. 

A terrible river in Hell. 

The Lord of the Ocean. 

Scripture. It is in four books— Rig - 
veda, Yajur Veda , Saama Veda and 
Atharva Veda. 

Law, decree of fate, that which is 
ordained. 

‘Lightning Tongued,’ a Raakshasa 
sorcerer. 

Mother of Garuda. 

See Naaraayana. 

A rishi who was father of Raavana. 

The celestial architect. 

An Asura killed by Indra. 

Sacrifice, a religious ceremony accom¬ 
panied by oblations. 

He who performs a sacrifice, Master 
of Ceremonies. 

A class of celestial beings. 

God of Death. 

A measure of distance equal probably 
to nine miles. 

Son of the King of Kekaya. Brother 
of Kaikeyi. 

Prince-Regent. 










Qa. 4-- Sqiz- 

5 PT v 5 ?c 

Class No. B< 

Author <^°- ft- gMjg^V 

r\ f / O' 

Title mv^k caju <^a>- 


( & < 2/16 

sretfar 

Acc. No.^&sg* 


Book No,. 


faJTJT fearer 


K^TTfSTT 

Date of Issue 

Borrower's No. 

Signature 


29 4-S922 

ffji LIBRARY 

LAL BAHADUR SHASTRI 

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ADHINISTRATIOI 

MUSSOORIE 

Accession No .^ 

1. Books are issued for 15 days only but 
may have to be recalled earlier if 
urgently required. 

2. An overdue charge of 25 Paisa per day 
per volume will be charged. 

3. Books may be renewed on request, at 
the discretion of the Librarian. 

A Periodicals. Rare and Reference books 

QL 294 *Q99 Jed and mg y 131 

RAJ »Library. 

impn VT'Svi 

LBSNAA 


